+++
title = "Python"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Programming Languages]({{< relref "20221101220306-programming_languages.md" >}})


## Modules/Packages/Imports {#modules-packages-imports}

-   A `module` is a python file, and a `package` is a directory of modules with an `__init__` (Edit: and/or a `__main__` ).
-   Even following the release of 3.3, the details of how sys.path is initialised are still somewhat [challenging to figure out.](https://python-notes.curiousefficiency.org/en/latest/python_concepts/import_traps.html)


### File loading {#file-loading}

-   Just knowing what directory a file is in does not determine what package Python thinks it is in.
-   Since Python 2.6 a module's "name" is effectively `__package__ + '.' + ___name__`, or just `__name__` if `__package__` is `None`


#### Two ways to load a Python file {#two-ways-to-load-a-python-file}

-   **As top-level script**
    -   When executed directly, for instance by typing `python myfile.py`
    -   `__name__` : `__main__`
-   **As a module**
    -   When an import statement is encountered inside some other file.
    -   `__name__` : [the filename, preceded by the names of any packages/subpackages of which it is a part, separated by dots], eg. `package.subpackage1.moduleX`
    -   **NOTE:** If you run `moduleX` as the top-level script (eg. `python -m package.subpackage1.moduleX`), the `__name__` will instead be `__main__`. (Just a variant of top-level script)
    -   The **most important takeaway** is that: the name of the module depends on how you loaded it.
        -   It doesn't matter where the file actually is on disk.
        -   If a module's name has no dots, it is not considered to be part of a package.
-   Special case: REPL
    -   A special case is if you run the interpreter interactively, the name of that interactive session is `__main__`
        -   You cannot do relative imports directly from an interactive session.
    -   Python adds the current directory to its search path(`sys.path`) when the interpreter is entered interactively.
        -   This is why you're able to do `import moduleX`, if its in the same directory.
        -   It will not know that the directory is part of a package.


### Imports {#imports}


#### Relative imports {#relative-imports}

-   Relative imports are only for use within module files.
-   Relative imports use the module's name to determine where it is in a package.
-   If your module's name is `__main__`, it is not considered to be in a package. You cannot use relative imports then.


#### Absolute imports {#absolute-imports}

-   Absolute imports [were added later](https://peps.python.org/pep-0328/)


### Packages {#packages}

-   Technically, a package is a module that has a `__path__` attribute.


#### Types {#types}

-   Named packages
    -   Python 3.3+: supports implicit namespace packages that allows it to create a package without an `__init__.py` file.
    -   Python 2: You [needed to do weird shit](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/guides/packaging-namespace-packages/)
    -   Creating a namespace package should **ONLY** be done if there is a [need for it](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/37139786/is-init-py-not-required-for-packages-in-python-3-3). i.e  if you have different libraries that reside in different locations and you want them each to contribute a subpackage to the parent package.
    -   Namespace packages can exist in more than one place at a time, while regular packages cannot.

<!--listend-->

```markdown
    /usr/lib/python3.9/site-packages/
    └── foobar/
        └── nice.py

    /usr/local/lib/python3.9/site-packages/
    └── foobar/
        └── wow.py
```

-   Regular packages
    -   A package with a `__init__.py` (empty or not empty)
        -   Leaving an `__init__.py` file empty is normal, if the package’s modules and sub-packages do not need to share any code.
    -   A directory with a C extension named `__init__.so` or with a `.pyc` file named `__init__.pyc` is also a regular package.
    -   The `__init__.py` file
        -   Typically left empty
        -   Can contains package-related attributes such as `__doc__` and `__version__`
        -   Can be used to decouple the **public API** of a package from its internal implementation.


### Module {#module}

-   Keep module names short, lowercase, and avoid special symbols like `_`,.,- etc.
-   **Don’t namespace with underscores, use submodules instead.**


#### Glossary {#glossary}

-   [Python behind the scenes #11: how the Python import system works](https://tenthousandmeters.com/blog/python-behind-the-scenes-11-how-the-python-import-system-works/)
-   **Module object:** a Python object that acts as a namespace for the module's names. The names are stored in the module object's dictionary (available as `m.__dict__`), so we can access them as attributes.
-   **Built-in modules**: C modules compiled into the python executable.
-   **Frozen modules:** Part of the python executable, but they are written in Python. Python code is compiled to a code object and then the marshalled code object is incorporated into the executable.
-   **C extensions**: A bit like built-in modules and a bit like Python files.
    -   Written in C or C++ and interact with Python via the Python/C API.
    -   They are not a part of the executable but loaded dynamically during the import.
    -   Some standard modules including `array`, `math` and `select` are C extensions.
    -   `asyncio`, `heapq` and `json` are written in Python but call C extensions under the hood.
-   Python bytecode:
    -   Typically live in a `__pycache__` directory
    -   They are the result of compiling Python code to bytecode.
    -   Its purpose is to reduce module's loading time by skipping the compilation stage.


#### Different kinds of modules in use {#different-kinds-of-modules-in-use}

-   Built-in modules such as `os` and `sys`
-   Frozen modules.
-   C extensions.
-   Python source code files or `pyc` files
-   Third-party modules you have installed in your environment
-   Your project’s internal modules (directories)


#### How to import {#how-to-import}

```python
# bad
from modu import *
x = sqrt(4)  # Is sqrt part of modu? A builtin? Defined above?

# better
from modu import sqrt
[...]
x = sqrt(4)  # sqrt may be part of modu, if not redefined in between

# best
import modu
x = modu.sqrt(4)  # sqrt is visibly part of modu's namespace
```


#### Operation {#operation}

`import pack.modu` , this:

-   It'll look for an `__init__.py` file in `pack`, execute all of its top-level statements.
-   Then it will look for a file named `pack/modu.py` and execute all of its top-level statements.
-   Creates a `module object` for that `module`, and assigns the `module object` to the `variable`.


#### Module object {#module-object}

-   The type of a `module object` is `PyModule_Type` in the C code but it's not available in Python as a built-in.

<!--listend-->

```python
from types import ModuleType
# what type does
# import sys (could be any other module)
# ModuleType = type(sys)
# ModuleType
m = ModuleType('m') # this is what happens when we import
```


### Directory structure {#directory-structure}

-   [Python Application Layouts: A Reference – Real Python](https://realpython.com/python-application-layouts/)
-   A good idea is to have all files that you intend to execute in the top-level directory, and only pure library-modules in the nested folders
-   You should structure it so that you only import things that are at the same level or lower in the folder hierarchy.


### Issues {#issues}


#### Double import {#double-import}

**“Never add a package directory, or any directory inside a package, directly to the Python path”**
The reason: every module in that directory is now potentially accessible under two different names

-   As a top level module (since the directory is on `sys.path`)
-   As a submodule of the package (if the higher level directory containing the package itself is also on `sys.path`).


## Namespace and Scope {#namespace-and-scope}

-   [Namespaces and Scope in Python – Real Python](https://realpython.com/python-namespaces-scope/)
