+++
title = "Web Animation"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Web Development]({{< relref "20221108105344-web_development.md" >}})


## The levels of web animation {#the-levels-of-web-animation}

I found this [excellent comment](https://www.reddit.com/r/Frontend/comments/ly6squ/comment/gpr68un/) on reddit, this is the summarization:

-   Level0 (State change): State change effects, hover, focus etc.
-   Level1 (Class transitions): Class change effects, changes that take place when class is changed. Class is changed with JS.
-   Level2 (CSS animations): Whenever we need keyframe animations, like spinners.
-   Level3 (Moving in/out of DOM)
    -   This is fine for out of flow things like tooltip and stuff
    -   For static things, where you know the size of the content(eg. accordion) you can use max-height etc.
    -   For more dynamic things, you'll have to use JS for that to measure the size of elements before and after they're visible.
-   Level4 (Scroll transitions)
    -   They can be as simple as using JS to detect when an element becomes visible and use basic state transitions
    -   But it can also be complex, like really using the scroll distance to play the transition as the scroll happens
-   Level5 (Page transitions)
    -   If you have the index page of a blog with list of posts that have an image and a title
    -   the page transition would be that on click on a post, the post thumbnail moves to become the background of the page and the titles moves as well
    -   before the rest of the content appears, as if you'd never left the page.

I feel like these level approach is nice but can be improved and extended. I should come back and improve this list someday.
