+++
title = "Golang"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Programming Languages]({{< relref "20221101220306-programming_languages.md" >}}), [Concurrency in Golang]({{< relref "20230412015037-concurrency_in_golang.md" >}})


## Compiling, Linking and OS dependencies {#compiling-linking-and-os-dependencies}


### Syscalls {#syscalls}


#### How does go make syscalls? {#how-does-go-make-syscalls}

-   [Differs](https://www.reddit.com/r/rust/comments/n8iq0f/how_does_the_rust_standard_library_work/) by [Operating](https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/lapzam/go_116_will_make_system_calls_through_libc_on/) [system](https://groups.google.com/g/golang-nuts/c/uX8eUeyuuAY)
-   In Linux, because it has a [stable ABI](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/55735864/how-does-go-make-system-calls), it makes the syscalls directly skipping `libc`. w Linux, the kernel to userspace interface is stable(which syscalls use), but the [in kernel interfaces are not stable](https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/process/stable-api-nonsense.rst).
-   Enabling or disabling `CGO` has nothing to do with whether or not go syscall goes via `libc`, the C code used via `CGO` ofcourse will use `libc`.
-   Go does create wrappers around some syscalls (TODO: Need to dig into this)
-   Support for different syscalls in different OS is incremental. Eg. If `X` syscall is available in OS `A` and `B`. Go might have support for `X` only in `A` as of the moment.


#### Places where go handles syscalls {#places-where-go-handles-syscalls}

-   Try `fd syscall -t` on the go source tree.
-   [/syscall](https://pkg.go.dev/syscall@go1.20.2) : [Frozen](https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/jt1qfm/syscall_package_deprecated_question/), except for changes needed to maintain the core repository.
-   [/internal/syscall](https://pkg.go.dev/internal/syscall@go1.20.2) : internal
-   [/runtime/internal/syscall](https://pkg.go.dev/runtime/internal/syscall) : internal, [some details](https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/programming/GoSchedulerAndSyscalls)
-   [/x/sys](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/sys)
    -   This is where new stuff goes and should be used by callers
    -   Contains 3 packages to hold their syscall implementations(Unix, Windows and Plan 9)
    -   Has the wrapper creation libraries such as [mkwinsyscall.go](https://cs.opensource.google/go/x/sys/+/refs/tags/v0.6.0:windows/mkwinsyscall/mkwinsyscall.go) and [mksyscall.go](https://cs.opensource.google/go/x/sys/+/refs/tags/v0.6.0:unix/mksyscall.go)


### Portability {#portability}

-   syscalls are not portable by nature, they are specific to the system. We need to add a build tag for the ARCH and OS that syscall invocation is valid for.


### Dynamic and Static Linking {#dynamic-and-static-linking}


#### Static linking {#static-linking}

<!--list-separator-->

-  Directly

    -   `CGO_ENABLED=0 go build`
    -   [Matt Turner - Statically Linking Go in 2022](https://mt165.co.uk/blog/static-link-go/)

<!--list-separator-->

-  musl

    -   [Statically compiled Go programs, always, even with cgo, using musl](https://honnef.co/articles/statically-compiled-go-programs-always-even-with-cgo-using-musl/)
    -   You can also statically link with musl, but note that musl lacks features that people might want to use non-pure Go in the first place. For example, musl does't support arbitrary name resolvers, e.g. no LDAP support; it only supports DNS, just like the pure Go net package.
    -   On the other hand musl does support os/user.

<!--list-separator-->

-  glibc

    -   **STATIC LINKING OF GLIBC IS DISCOURAGED**
    -   It [makes extensive](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57476533/why-is-statically-linking-glibc-discouraged) internal use of `dlopen`, to load [nsswitch]({{< relref "20230228000520-nsswitch.md" >}}) modules and `iconv` [conversions](https://man7.org/tlpi/api_changes/index.html).


#### Dynamic linking {#dynamic-linking}

<!--list-separator-->

-  glibc versioning

    -   [GoAndGlibcVersioning](https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/programming/GoAndGlibcVersioning)

<!--list-separator-->

-  Other

    -   [Dynamic linking](https://drewdevault.com/dynlib.html)
    -   [A dynamic linking dependency problem in Golang](https://www.sobyte.net/post/2022-05/golang-dynamic-linking/)


### CGO {#cgo}

`CGO` is essentially utilizing C api calls to shared libraries exporting C interface. It is a [tradeoff](https://dave.cheney.net/2016/01/18/cgo-is-not-go).


#### Using CGO {#using-cgo}

-   `CGO_ENABLED=1`
-   Some things are only available as C libraries, re-implementing that in Go would be costly.
-   CGO is also used in some parts of standard library. Eg. ([net](https://pkg.go.dev/net#hdr-Name_Resolution) and os/user). It's not a strict requirement though, you can use these packages w/o CGO and they'll use stripped down version written in Go. But if you want the full thing, you have no other option than to enable `CGO`


#### Without using CGO {#without-using-cgo}

-   `CGO_ENABLED=0`
-   [GitHub - ebitengine/purego](https://github.com/ebitengine/purego)
-   [Introducing wazero from Tetrate - Tetrate](https://tetrate.io/blog/introducing-wazero-from-tetrate/?hss_channel=tw-998918265177952259)


### Cross Compilation {#cross-compilation}

See [Cross Compilation]({{< relref "20231031123241-cross_compilation.md" >}})


#### Cross compilation in Golang {#cross-compilation-in-golang}

-   Unless you're using a native cross compiler(eg. Clang, Golang Compiler), to cross-compile a program, you need to separately build and install a complete gcc+binutils toolchain for every individual arch that you want to target.
-   Which Go this is easy(cross compiler out of the box) + dependencies ensured to support.


#### Cross compilation and CGO {#cross-compilation-and-cgo}

`CGO` allows us to access C libraries in the system we're building/compiling on. It has no idea about C libraries of other systems. So mostly CGO is disabled by default if cross-compiling. However, if you need to cross-compile go code with `CGO`, you need a cross-compiling C compiler for the target machine. It can be done but it is a bit of PITA.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Using Zig

    -   See [this](https://zig.news/kristoff/building-sqlite-with-cgo-for-every-os-4cic) and [this](https://lucor.dev/post/cross-compile-golang-fyne-project-using-zig/)

    <!--listend-->

    ```shell
    CGO_ENABLED=1 GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 CC="zig cc -target x86_64-linux" CXX="zig c++ -target x86_64-linux" go build --tags extended
    ```

<!--list-separator-->

-  Naively Compiling

    -   Compile in an actual machine w of target directly
    -   You can [use chroot](https://blog.surgut.co.uk/2014/06/cross-compile-go-code-including-cgo.html)
    -   You can [use](https://dh1tw.de/2019/12/cross-compiling-golang-cgo-projects/) [containers](https://goreleaser.com/cookbooks/cgo-and-crosscompiling/)
    -   Other [stuff](https://github.com/FiloSottile/homebrew-musl-cross)


#### Others {#others}

-   [TinyGo](https://tinygo.org/)


## Packages and Modules {#packages-and-modules}

<div class="warning small-text">

> -   Read [Go Modules Reference](https://go.dev/ref/mod#glos-vendor-directory)
> -   module-aware mode is the way 2 go me fren. (GO111MODULE=""/auto)
> -   ditch gopath
</div>


### Meta notes {#meta-notes}

-   `package path` and `module path` may look similar, the difference lies in the existence of `go.mod` file inside the directory. i.e Repository root need not be the place where the `module` is defined.


### Packages {#packages}

-   `package path` / `import path`
    -   Identity of a package
    -   `module path` + subdirectory
    -   Eg. `golang.org/x/net/html`
-   Each directory that has Go source code inside, possibly including the root directory, is a `package`.
-   Example: `x/...` matches `x` as well as `x`'s subdirectories.


### Module {#module}

-   The tree(`module`) with branches(`packages`) and leafs(`*.go` files) growing on branches.
-   `packages` sharing the same lifecycle(`version number`) are bundled into a `module`.
-   `module path`
    -   Defined in the `go.mod` file by the `module directive`
    -   Identity of a module
    -   Acts as a prefix for `package` import paths within the module.
    -   Eg. `golang.org/x/net`, `golang.org/x/tools/gopls`


### Semantic versioning &amp; versions from VCS {#semantic-versioning-and-versions-from-vcs}

-   A version identifies an immutable snapshot of a `module`. Each version starts with the letter `v` + semantic versioning.
-   `v0.0.0, v1.12.134, v8.0.5-pre, v9.2.2-beta+meta and v2.0.9+meta` are valid versions.


#### VCS and pseudo versioning {#vcs-and-pseudo-versioning}

-   We can also get `modules` from VCS using `tags/branches/revisions/commits` that don’t follow semantic versioning.
-   In these cases, the go command will replace `golang.org/x/net@daa7c041` with `v0.0.0-20191109021931-daa7c04131f5`.
-   This is called `pseudo-version`. You usually won't be typing a pseudo version by hand.


#### Why separate directory for Major versions {#why-separate-directory-for-major-versions}

<div class="warning small-text">

> Golden rule:
> If an old package and a new package have the same import path
> &rArr; The new package must be backwards compatible with the old package.
</div>

-   `v0` / `pre-release` suffix: Unstable, doesn't need to be backwards compatible. No major version suffix directory allowed. So when starting new projects be under `v0` as long as possible.
-   `v1` : Defines the compatibility/stability. No major version suffix directory allowed.
-   `v2` / `v2+`  : Since major version bump by definition means breaking changes, by the golden rule, we need it to have separate module path.


### Building {#building}


#### What happens when go command tries to load a package? {#what-happens-when-go-command-tries-to-load-a-package}

-   When we try to load a `package`, indirectly we need to find the `module path`
-   It first looks into the `build list`, if not found it'll try to fetch the `module` (latest version) from a `module proxy` mentioned in the `GOPROXY` env var.
-   `go tidy` / `go get` does this automatically.


#### Generating build list {#generating-build-list}

-   When we run the go command, a list of final module versions is prepared from the `go.mod` file of `main module` + `transitively required modules` using minimal version selection. This final list of `module+version` is used for `go{build,list,test,etc}`. This is the `build list`
-   `// indirect` : This is added to `go.mod` of main module, when module is not directly required in the `main module`. So you should have all the dependencies in the `go.mod` file.


### Workspaces {#workspaces}

-   New feature 1.18+
-   You’re not meant to commit `go.work` files. They are meant for local changes only.
-   Has `use` and `replace` directives that can be useful for scratch work


### Module Proxy {#module-proxy}

-   module proxy is an HTTP server that can respond to GET requests for certain paths
-   We don't have a central package authority in the vein of `npm` or `crates.io`. Go modules have no `names`, only `paths`. The package management system uses the `package path/module path` to learn how to get the package. If it can't find the package locally, it'll try getting it from a `module proxy`.
-   module proxy related vars: `GOPRIVATE`, `GONOPROXY`, `GOPROXY="https://proxy.golang.org,direct"`
-   Different module proxies can have their own conventions (Eg. `gopkg.in` has some diff conventions)


#### Access private packages is a PITA {#access-private-packages-is-a-pita}

-   I haven't faced this issue yet, but for when I do.
-   [SuperQue comments on What “sucks” about Golang?](https://www.reddit.com/r/golang/comments/11o2yfd/what_sucks_about_golang/jbrxe7l/)
-   [languitar/pass-git-helper](https://github.com/languitar/pass-git-helper)


## Project organization and dependencies {#project-organization-and-dependencies}


### Standard Library {#standard-library}

-   In tree : You can find these in the go source tree. Check [Standard library](https://pkg.go.dev/std)
-   Out of tree : Part of go but out of tree, at `/x`. Check [Sub-repositories](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x)


### Project structure {#project-structure}

<div class="warning small-text">

> -   multi-module monorepos is unusual
> -   multi-package monorepo is common
</div>


## Language topics {#language-topics}


### Pointers {#pointers}

-   There's no pointer arithmetic in go
-   Go guarantees that, thing being pointed to will continue to be valid for the lifetime of the pointer.
    ```go
    func f() *int {
            i := 1
            return &i
    } // Go will arrange memory to store i after f returns.
    ```


### Methods {#methods}

-   In general, all methods on a given type should have either value or pointer receivers, but not a mixture of both.


### Context {#context}

-   It's not possible for a function that takes a `context.Context` and cancel it.
-   All it could do is `newCtx, cancel := context.WithCancel(origCtx)`.
-   In that case, when `cancel()` is called `newCtx` will be canceled, but `origCtx` will not.
-   `newCtx` will have access to the same values as `origCtx` and will be canceled either when `cancel()` is called or `origCtx` is canceled
-   More on context: [Break The Golang Context Chain » Rodaine](https://rodaine.com/2020/07/break-context-cancellation-chain/)
-   Even more: [Chris's Wiki blog/programming/GoContextValueMistake](https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/programming/GoContextValueMistake)


### Maps {#maps}

-   Go Maps are hashmap. O(1) ACR, O(n) WCR
-   A Map value is a pointer to a `runtime.hmap` structure.
-   Since it's a pointer, it should be written as `*map[int]int` instead of `map[int]int`. Go team changed this historically cuz it was [confusing anyway](https://dave.cheney.net/2017/04/30/if-a-map-isnt-a-reference-variable-what-is-it).
-   Maps change it's structure
    -   When you insert or delete entries
    -   The map may need to rebalance itself to retain its O(1) guarantee
-   What the compiler does when you use map
    ```go
    v := m["key"]     // → runtime.mapaccess1(m, ”key", &v)
    v, ok := m["key"] // → runtime.mapaccess2(m, ”key”, &v, &ok)
    m["key"] = 9001   // → runtime.mapinsert(m, ”key", 9001)
    delete(m, "key")  // → runtime.mapdelete(m, “key”)
    ```


### Embedding interfaces &amp; structs {#embedding-interfaces-and-structs}

-   It's not subclassing, but we can borrow types in `struct` and `interfaces`
-   Interface
    ```go
    // combines Reader and Writer
    type ReadWriter interface {
        Reader
        Writer
    }
    ```
-   Struct (embedding directly, no additional bookkeeping)
    -   When invoked, the receiver of the method is the inner type not the outer one.
    -   i.e when the `Read` method of a `bufio.ReadWriter` is invoked, receiver is the inner `Reader` and not `ReadWriter`.

<!--listend-->

```go

// bufio.ReadWriter
type ReadWriter struct {
    *Reader  // *bufio.Reader
    *Writer  // *bufio.Writer
	*log.Logger
}

// - the type name of the field, ignoring the package
//   qualifier, serves as a field name
// - Name conflicts are ez resolvable
var poop ReadWriter
poop.Reader // refers to inner Reader
poop.Logger // refers to inner Logger
```

-   Struct (embedding in-directly, additional bookkeeping)
    ```go
    type ReadWriter struct {
        reader *Reader
        writer *Writer
    }
    func (rw *ReadWriter) Read(p []byte) (n int, err error) {
        return rw.reader.Read(p)
    }
    ```


### Error and panics {#error-and-panics}

-   `recover` only makes sense inside `defer`
-   `defer` can modify named return values


### Aliases {#aliases}

-   type byte = uint8
-   type rune = int32
-   type any = interface{}


### Interfaces {#interfaces}

-   Interfaces are just description of what something should resemble, by the methods.
-   The implementation of the interface can be done by a `struct`, `int`, `func` anything. Doesn't matter. You can define a method on a `func`, on a `int` just the same way you can define a method on a `struct`.


### io stuff {#io-stuff}

Ben Johnson has great blogpost series covering these in good depth


#### Overview of io related packages {#overview-of-io-related-packages}

-   `io`
    -   Abstractions on `byte-stream`
    -   General io utility functions that don't fit elsewhere.
-   `bufio`
    -   Like `io` but with a buffer
    -   Wraps io.Reader and io.Writer and helps w automatic buffering
-   `bytes`
    -   Represent byte slice(`[]byte`) as `byte-stream` (`strings` also provide this)
    -   general operations on `[]byte`.
    -   `bytes.Buffer` implements `io.Writer` (useful for tests)
-   `io/ioiutil` (deprecated)
    -   `Deprecated`
    -   functionality moved to io or os packages


#### io {#io}

<!--list-separator-->

-  Reading

    -   `Read`
        -   returns `io.EOF` as normal part of usage
        -   If you pass an 8-byte slice you could receive anywhere between 0 and 8 bytes back.
    -   `ReadFull`
        -   for strict reading of bytes into buffer.
    -   `MultiReader`
        -   Concat multiple readers into one
        -   Things are read in sequence
        -   Eg. Concat in memory header with some file reader
    -   `TeeReader`
        -   Like the `tee` command. Specify an duplicate writer when reader gets read. Might be useful for debugging etc.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Writing

    -   `MultiWriter`
        -   Duplicate writes to multiple writers. Similar to `TeeReader` tho but happens when writing shit
    -   `WriteString`
        -   An performance improvement on `Write` on packages that support it. Falls back to `Write`

<!--list-separator-->

-  Transferring btwn Reading &amp; Writing

    -   `Copy` : Allocates a 32KB temp buff to copy from `src:Reader` to `dst:Writer`
    -   `CopyBuffer` : Provide your own buffer instead on letting `Copy` create one
    -   `CopyN` : Similar to copy but you can set a limit on total bytes. Useful when reader is continuously growing for example or want to do limited read etc.
    -   `WriteTo` and `ReadFrom` are optimized methods that are supposed to transfer data without additional allocation. If available, `Copy` will use these.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Files

    Usually, you have a continuous stream of bytes. But files are exceptions. You can do stuff like `Seek` w them.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Reading and Writing Bytes(uint8) &amp; Runes(int32)

    -   ByteReader
    -   ByteWriter
    -   ByteScanner
    -   RuneReader
    -   RuneScanner
    -   There's no RuneWriter btw


#### bytes and strings package {#bytes-and-strings-package}

Provides a way to interface in-memory `[]byte` and `string` as `io.Reader` and `io.Writers`

-   `bytes` package has 2 types
    -   `bytes.Reader` which implements `io.Reader` (`NewReader`)
    -   `bytes.Buffer` which implements `io.Writer`
-   `bytes.Buffer` is OK for tests etc
    -   Consider `bufio` for proper usecases w buffer related io.
    -   `bytes.Buffer` is a buffer with two ends
        -   can only read from the start of it
        -   can only write to the end of it
        -   No seeking


### strings, bytes, runes, characters {#strings-bytes-runes-characters}

-   Formal `for` loop will loop through `byte` in `string` but `for range` loop will loop through `rune`
-   `string` : Readonly slice of `bytes`. NOT slice of characters.
-   "poop" is a string. \`poop\` is a raw string.
    -   `string` can contain escape sequences, so they're not always UTF-8.
    -   `raw string` cannot contain escape sequences, only UTF-8 because Go source code is UTF-8. (almost always)
-   Unicode
    -   See [Unicode]({{< relref "20221126085853-unicode.md" >}})
    -   code point `U+2318`, hex val `2318`, (bytes `e28c98`) represents the symbol `⌘`.
-   `character`
    -   May be represented by a number of different sequences of `code points`
        -   i.e different sequences of UTF-8 bytes
    -   In Go, we call [Unicode]({{< relref "20221126085853-unicode.md" >}}) `code points` as `rune` (`int32`).


### Encoding {#encoding}


#### Encoding vs Marshaling {#encoding-vs-marshaling}

-   Usually these mean the same thing, but Go has specific meanings.
-   `x.Encoder` &amp; `x.Decoder` are for working w `io.Writer` &amp;  `io.Reader` (files eg.)
-   `x.Marshaler` &amp; `x.Unmarshaler` are for working w `[]byte` (in memory)


#### Encoding for Primitives vs Complex objects {#encoding-for-primitives-vs-complex-objects}

<!--list-separator-->

-  Primitive stuff

    -   bytes
        -   Text encoding(base64)/ binary encoding
        -   `encoding` package
            -   BinaryMarshaler, BinaryUnmarshaler, TextMarshaler, TextUnmarshaler
            -   These are not used so much because there’s not a single defined way to marshal an object to binary format. Instead we have [Custom Protocols]({{< relref "20230221012237-custom_protocols.md" >}}) which is covered w other packages such as `encoding/json` etc.
        -   `encoding/hex`, `encoding/base64` etc.
    -   integers
        -   `encoding/binary`, wen we needs endian stuff and variable length encoding
        -   For in-memory we have `ByteOrder` interface
        -   For streams we have `Read` and `Write`. This also supports composite types but better to just use [Custom Protocols]({{< relref "20230221012237-custom_protocols.md" >}}).
    -   string
        -   ASCII, UTF8
        -   `unicode/utf16`, `encoding/ascii85`, `golang.org/x/text`, `fmt`, `strconv` etc.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Complex obj stuff

    -   Complex objects is where [Custom Protocols]({{< relref "20230221012237-custom_protocols.md" >}}) comes in
    -   This is mostly about encoding more complex stuff like language specific data structure etc.
    -   Here we can go JSON, CSV, [Protocol Buffers]({{< relref "20230522131118-protocol_buffers.md" >}}), MsgPack etc etc.
    -   In a sense, [Database]({{< relref "20221102123145-database.md" >}})'es also encode data for us.
    -   Example packages: `encoding/json`, `encoding/xml`, `encoding/csv`, `encoding/gob`. Other external stuff is always there like [Protocol Buffers]({{< relref "20230522131118-protocol_buffers.md" >}}).


#### More on encoding/json {#more-on-encoding-json}

-   Encoding process
    -   For primitives we have in-built mapping for json
    -   For custom objects, it checks if types for `json.Marshaler`, if not then  `encoding.TextMarshaler`. Eg. `Time` implements `TextMarshaler` which creates RFC3339 string. Otherwise it builds it from primitives then that's cached for future use.
-   Decoding
    -   2 parts
        -   1st parse (Scanner)
        -   convert stuff to appropriate data type. Eg. Base 10 numbers to base 2 ints. (Decodestate) Uses reflect
    -   JSON is LL(1) Parsable. (See [Context Free Grammar (CFG)]({{< relref "20230422102551-context_free_grammar_cfg.md" >}})) so uses uses a single byte lookahead buffer


### cgo {#cgo}

|         | Go Pointer, Pass to Go | Go Pointer, Pass to C       |
|---------|------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Go code | YES                    | YES, must point to C memory |
| C code  | NO                     |                             |

-   Go's pointer type can contain C pointers aswell as Go pointers
-   Go pointers, passed to C may only point to data stored in C


## Application architecture {#application-architecture}

> -   Accept interfaces(broader types)
> -   Return structs(specific types)

-   See [Design Patterns]({{< relref "20221125204047-design_patterns.md" >}})
-   Watch [Workshop: Practical Go - GoSG Meetup - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gi7t6Pl9rxE)
-   Watch [Dave Cheney - SOLID Go Design - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzAdEt3xZ1M)
-   Read [Go and a Package Focused Design | Gopher Academy Blog](https://blog.gopheracademy.com/advent-2016/go-and-package-focused-design/)
-   `Models` can be analogous to `type` (core)
-   `Controller` can be analogous to `handlers` (does not do core)
-   `Service things` these contain specific core logic etc.


### Handler vs HandlerFunc {#handler-vs-handlerfunc}

-   Anything(struct/function etc.) that implements the `http.Handler` interface
-   The interface has the `ServeHTTP` method for handling HTTP requests and generating response
-   Avoid putting business logic in handlers the same way you won't put business logic into controllers
-   `http.HandlerFunc` is an example of a handler (of type function) which implements `http.Handler`
-   When we write functions that contain the signature of `http.HandlerFunc` we've written a handler function.


## Resources and Links {#resources-and-links}


### Go and sqlite {#go-and-sqlite}

-   See [sqlite]({{< relref "20230702184501-sqlite.md" >}}) also see [Go and SQLite in the Cloud](https://www.golang.dk/articles/go-and-sqlite-in-the-cloud)
-   [mattn/go-sqlite3](https://github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3) : Uses [cgo](https://github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3/commit/2df077b74c66723d9b44d01c8db88e74191bdd0e) (most commonly used). But cgo takes os thread.
    -   See [this link](https://github.com/mattn/go-sqlite3/issues/1022#issuecomment-1067353980) for some usage tips
-   [cznic/sqlite](https://gitlab.com/cznic/sqlite) : Somehow [translates](https://gitlab.com/cznic/ccgo) C code to Go.
-   [ncruces/go-sqlite3](https://github.com/ncruces/go-sqlite3) : wraps a WASM build of SQLite, and uses [wazero](https://wazero.io/) to provide cgo-free SQLite bindings.
-   ORM
    -   [go-gorm/sqlite](https://github.com/go-gorm/sqlite): GORM sqlite driver
    -   [glebarez/sqlite](https://github.com/glebarez/sqlite/): The pure-Go SQLite driver for GORM (fork)
    -   [glebarez/go-sqlite:](https://github.com/glebarez/go-sqlite) pure-Go SQLite driver for Go (SQLite embedded)
