+++
title = "Tasker notes"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

## Setting up camera capture on locked phone {#setting-up-camera-capture-on-locked-phone}

I have tasker pro and after a number of attempts I was unable to get my phone to capture a photograph remotely through an SMS.  I have given tasker required permissions through:

```shell
adb shell pm grant net.dinglisch.android.taskerm android.permission.WRITE_SECURE_SETTINGS
```

But it seems like it just doesn't work, as mentioned here: [Locked screen photo help : tasker](https://www.reddit.com/r/tasker/comments/u8v9sc/locked_screen_photo_help/)

So I really need this functionality and decided to go the `tasker` + `termux` route.


### Installing dependencies {#installing-dependencies}

-   First you need [Termux:Tasker](https://f-droid.org/packages/com.termux.tasker/) which will bridge tasker and termux. You'll need to grant `tasker` permissions to use `termux`, you'll find this in `tasker`'s additional permissions section.
-   After that you'll need to use the program called `termux-camera-photo` which requires `termux` to have access to your phone api. For this you'll have to install [Termux:API](https://f-droid.org/en/packages/com.termux.api/)(This will grant you the required permissions) once done you'll have to install `termux-api` inside `termux` which will have you installed `termux-camera-photo` and other programs which will use the `Termux:API`.
-   At this point you're all set to take photos using `termux`. See `termux-camea-photo -h`


### Setting up storage {#setting-up-storage}

-   But by default `termux` does not have shared storage on. What I intended to do is take photograph and upload it to google drive, this requires `termux` to have shared storage access so that it can store the photo. See [Internal and external storage - Termux Wiki](https://wiki.termux.com/wiki/Internal_and_external_storage). You simply have to run `termux-setup-storage` and you'll be good to go.


### Execution from tasker to tmux {#execution-from-tasker-to-tmux}

-   Now I need to setup `tasker` to use `termux` to capture the photo. This requires setting the `allow-external-apps` to `true` in `~/.termux/termux.properties`. (Basically uncommenting a line). ****I had issues with this approach****
-   The approach I used is just creating bash scripts inside `~/.termux/tasker` and using them from the `termux` plugin inside `tasker`. Works great :)
