+++
title = "Typescript"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Web Development]({{< relref "20221108105344-web_development.md" >}}), [Javascript]({{< relref "20221126085225-javascript.md" >}}), [Programming Languages]({{< relref "20221101220306-programming_languages.md" >}})


## Intro stuff {#intro-stuff}

-   JS is weakly-typed. So type-coercion can happen
    -   Primitive coercion: `[@@toPrimitive]("default") → valueOf() → toString()`
    -   Numeric coercion: `[@@toPrimitive]("number") → valueOf() → toString()`
    -   String coercion: `[@@toPrimitive]("string") → toString() → valueOf()`
-   TS is a programming language developed by Microsoft.
    -   Typed superset of [Javascript]({{< relref "20221126085225-javascript.md" >}})
    -   Includes its own compiler.


### Self realizations (aha moments) {#self-realizations--aha-moments}

-   TS lets you play with types the way you play with values in a general programming language. Eg. You have a type and now you want to extract/transform parts of it into another type.
-   This kind of thing you usually do with values but with typescript this is now possible. It's sort of has a regex feel to types, in-sense what regex makes possible.
-   Type functions and Values
    -   `type ReturnWhatIPassIn<T> = T;` : This right here is a function that handles `types`, unlike functions that handle `values` that I know of in normal [Javascript]({{< relref "20221126085225-javascript.md" >}}) syntax.
    -   `type ReturnWhatIPassIn = string;` : This right here is a static value of a `type`.
    -   So you can basically play with types just the way you play with values
-   Just like programming with values, there are multiple ways of getting the same result. Getting better at it will take time and more doing w it.


### Primitive types {#primitive-types}

-   All basic types of [Javascript]({{< relref "20221126085225-javascript.md" >}})
-   `any` : allow anything
-   `unknown` : ensure someone using this type declares what the type is
-   `never`: it’s not possible that this type could happen
-   `void`: a function which returns undefined or has no return value


### Custom types {#custom-types}

-   `interface`
    -   Mutable
    -   Good for behavior, can be `extended` and [merged](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/declaration-merging.html)
    -   Can be used for a subset of things, functions, objects etc.
-   `type`
    -   Immutable
    -   More features than `interface`
    -   Good for data, can be intersected(composed using `|` and `&`).
    -   Can be used for everything.


#### To use `types` or `interfaces` ? {#to-use-types-or-interfaces}

-   Use interface until you need to use features from type. This goes the opposite way too.
-   Doesn't really matter which one you go with.
-   But some people use type by default too. It boils down to personal preferences and needs.
-   My current verdict as of June'23: I'll go w default `type`, if I need something that needs extending, use `interface`


#### What about `namespace`? {#what-about-namespace}


### Composing types {#composing-types}


#### `union` {#union}

-   Basically using `|`
-   You can't really declare them, conceptually helpful to think of them like possibilities(multiverse).
-   Only `types` can be union'ed not `interfaces`.
-   We also have discriminated unions, where there's a common property that distinguishes what's getting union'ed and then we can later use `typeof`
    -   I think these are like `variants` in [Ocaml]({{< relref "20230529194221-ocaml.md" >}}) (See [Type Systems]({{< relref "20230922184505-type_systems.md" >}}))


#### `generics` {#generics}

-   Every function call has 2 argument lists
    -   Value arguments(runtime) : Parenthesis `()`
    -   Type arguments(typecheck/compile time) : Pointy brackets `<>`
-   We can think `generics` as the type arguments, sort of fill-in-the-blanks types.
-   It allows your type to more dynamic by allowing other types to be part of the original type. Eg. You couldn't indicate the type of array at all without generics. `Array<string>` is using generics.
-   Generics in classes and functions are different but use similar syntaxes.
-   We do want to constraint the parameter into a generic if we're doing things specific to the certain type. Usually constraint to generic parameter is added with `extends`. Eg. `Poop<T extends string>`
-   For reverse constraint, you can use `Object` or `{}` to match anything but `null` or `undefined`


### Duck type {#duck-type}

<div class="warning small-text">

> If it walks like a duck and it quacks like a duck, then it must be a duck.
</div>

TS follows duck typing. If the structure is same, you need to explicitly set the type.

```typescript
interface Point {x: number; y: number;}
function logPoint(p: Point) {console.log(`${p.x}, ${p.y}`);}
const point = { x: 12, y: 26 };
const point2 = { x: 12, y: 26, z: 89 }; // this would work too! needs to be a subset
class VirtualPoint {
  x: number;
  y: number;
  constructor(x: number, y: number) {this.x = x; this.y = y;}
}
const point3 = new VirtualPoint(13, 56);
logPoint(point); // works, but point was never mentioned to be "Point"
logPoint(point2); // works, but point was never mentioned to be "Point"
logPoint(point3); // works, but point was never mentioned to be "Point"
```


## Random things {#random-things}


### Levels of TS {#levels-of-ts}

-   Values exist at the dynamic level.
-   Types exist at the static level.

Similarly,

-   Normal functions exist at the dynamic level, factories for `values`
    ```js
    const valueFactory = (x: number) => x; // definition
    const myValue = valueFactory(123); // use
    ```
-   Generic types exist at the static level, factories for `types`
    ```js
    type TypeFactory<X> = X; // definition
    type MyType = TypeFactory<string>; // use
    ```
-   Working together
    ```js
    function identity<Arg>(arg: Arg): Arg {
      return arg;
    }
    // %inferred-type: number
    const num1 = identity<number>(123);
    // %inferred-type: 123 NOTE: It's 123 and not number
    const num2 = identity(123);
    ```


### import type {#import-type}

See the following

[Do I need to use the import type](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/61412000/do-i-need-to-use-the-import-type-feature-of-typescript-3-8-if-all-of-my-import)


### Index signatures {#index-signatures}

-   TypeScript index signatures must be either `string` or `number` (also `symbols`?)

<!--listend-->

```js
interface Cache {
  [id:string] : string;
}
```


### Type Definitions from where? {#type-definitions-from-where}

To be able to show errors and hints from other packages, the compiler relies on declaration files. Two sources,

-   Bundle: check if a library has bundled types, look for an `index.d.ts` file in the project.
-   DefinitelyTyped: Crowdsourced repo
-   Local Declarations: Define it in `declarations.d.ts` maybe


### `declare` keyword {#declare-keyword}

-   declare specifies a type to an already existing variable, not declaring a new one.
-   eg. get external js file which has `foo` identifier, tsc doesn't know about it. So we do `declare const foo : string`, to tell the compiler that don't worry about `foo`, this is what it looks like it already has a type.


### Asserting type {#asserting-type}

-   When you know better exactly what type it would be.
-   Only allows type assertions which convert to a more specific or less specific version of a type. (impossible shit not allowed)
    ```typescript
    const myCanvas = document.getElementById("main_canvas") as HTMLCanvasElement;
    const a = (expr as any) as T; // workaround if ts is too strict
    ```
-   non-null assertions using `!` in cases where we trying to do something in an optional(`?`) property.


## Modules in TS {#modules-in-ts}

-   Any file containing a top-level `import` or `export` is considered a module and is **isolated**.
-   Any file without a top-level `import` or `export` is considered as a script whose contents are available in the **global scope**


### Export {#export}

-   export declarations
-   export statements
-   re-exports


### Import {#import}

-   importing other modules
-   explicit importing of types (guaranteed to be removed from your JavaScript, and tools like Babel can make better assumptions about your code)


## Tooling {#tooling}

-   The compiler (tsc), way to use it is via `npx tsc`
-   tsconfig bases: <https://github.com/tsconfig/bases>
    -   I like the base/tsconfig repo, but only for CJS configurations. Some mistakes might be there for esm. verify.
    -   using "moduleResolution": "node", but using "node" as the value is telling TypeScript to emit JavaScript that resolves as a CommonJS module.
-   what is @types??


### Declaration files {#declaration-files}

-   `.d.ts`


## Resources {#resources}

-   [Write your own Zod](https://zackoverflow.dev/writing/write-your-own-zod)
