+++
title = "NGOs"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [education]({{< relref "20220625162205-education.md" >}})


## Education NGOs {#education-ngos}

Help
: -   A program to help NGOs with their technical needs will connect to student developers who are willing to contribute their time to help the org. We'll mentor the student to maintain things and everything happens in an organized manner so that things are alright. Students can get some money if we have the fund of the org that gives a fund. DSC for NGOs.
    -   Musicians make cool upbeat music for NGOs, write compose and produce for minimal amount.
    -   Marketing teams for NGOs.

Organization
: -   Educational NGO's should have some kind of meta structuring.
    -   People related to an NGO, they can be related to multiple NGOs. This can help in determining which person is making more impact for real.
    -   Other metadata can include, location origin, impact location, timeline data, people related(same as above), goals, past names, related organizations, etc. This can help in determining if two organizations are working towards the same goal and can compliment each other. ****Use the power of emotion!****

Management
: -   NGOs should be sending some kind of heartbeat message to the mentoring organization, for that there should be a mentoring organization in place. ****Think about it!****

General
: -   We need a global wave of social entrepreneurship to create a highly motivated low-cost ways to learn at scale in the developing world.
