+++
title = "Javascript"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Programming Languages]({{< relref "20221101220306-programming_languages.md" >}})


## Random notes {#random-notes}

-   You can also use the unary plus `+` as a shorthand for `Number()`
-   If you pass any other object to the index signature the JavaScript runtime actually calls .toString on it before getting the result.
-   `object` is any non-primitive value, it includes things like functions, arrays and constructors, not just "simple" objects. `Object` behaves the same as `{}`.


## Concurrency in Javascipt {#concurrency-in-javascipt}

-   The single-threaded model has made Node.js a popular choice for server-side programming due to its non-blocking IO, making handling a large number of database or file-system requests very performant.
-   However, CPU-bound (computationally intensive) tasks that's pure JavaScript will still block the main thread.
-   To achieve real paralleling, you may need to use [workers](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Using_web_workers).

> Web Workers
>
> -   An API for running JavaScript code in a different browser’s thread.
> -   This is limited to have no access to the DOM (your HTML), it can communicate with the main thread only via messages.


## Memory management {#memory-management}

-   Understanding JS memory management also helps in understanding closures.
-   TODO: [JavaScript's Memory Management Explained | Felix Gerschau](https://felixgerschau.com/javascript-memory-management/?rel=reddit-javascript#the-memory-heap-and-stack)
-   TODO: [JavaScript memory model demystified](https://www.zhenghao.io/posts/javascript-memory)


### Heap and Stack {#heap-and-stack}

-   **There's no practical stack/heap distinction in JS. That would be an implementation detail of the JS engine.**
-   Function calls, however, work on what is referred to as the `call stack`, much as in most languages.
    -   This is **not** the memory stack in languages like golang.
    -   `Arguments` and `local variables` may continue to exist after a `function` is out of the `call stack` because they are stored **outside** the `call stack`


### Allocations {#allocations}

-   Declaring a function also allocates memory as function is just a callable object
-   Function expressions also allocate an object. (eg. specifying a function to `addEventListener`)
-   Some function calls result in object allocation. (eg. `new Date()`)


## Values {#values}


### Primitive {#primitive}

Immutable


### Non-primitive {#non-primitive}

Not Immutable


## Closures {#closures}

A closure is formed by:

-   Returning from a function from the execution context of a function call and referencing that inner function to a property of another object.
-   Directly assigning a reference to such a function object to, for example, a global variable, a property of a globally accessible object or an object passed by reference as an argument to the outer function call.


## Javascript Engines {#javascript-engines}

-   Chrome: v8 + UI part, Skia
-   Firefox: Spidermonkey, webrender
-   Node.js: V8 + I/O parts
