+++
title = "Containers"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

## Basics {#basics}

There is no such thing as a container, but only as much as containing is a thing you do.


### Implementations {#implementations}


#### Linux containers {#linux-containers}

Modern containers are a mix of cgroups, namespaces, pivot_root (like chroot but more appropriate for containers), and seccomp. But this is just one possible implementation. There are also, certainly, other ways of implementing containers.

-   [Docker]({{< relref "20230209185925-docker.md" >}}) : Docker is a reference implementation for the concept of containers. It provided a simple, practical way to bundle applications and their dependencies in a relatively standardized way. Docker’s main innovation was the layering system
-   [LXC &amp; LXD]({{< relref "20230223110853-lxc.md" >}})
-   Other linux container solutions: Some implementations (e.g. firecracker-containerd) also use SELinux and CPU virtualization support.


#### Others {#others}

-   OpenVZ and Solaris Containers (aka zones) both predate the current linux implementation and did not use namespaces or cgroups.
-   BSD Jails
-   One could ship application components as containers, but have them [run as VMs](https://fly.io/blog/sandboxing-and-workload-isolation/)
-   Dockers for Windows and Macs do not even use "cgroups" and "namespaces" because these technologies are not available on these stacks, it resorts to plain old VMs.


## Privileged and Unprivileged {#privileged-and-unprivileged}

Whether the root user in the container is the “real” root user (uid 0 at the kernel level).

<div class="warning small-text">

> Unprivileged containers != Rootless containers
>
> If containers are running as non-root users, when the runtime is still running as root, we don’t call them Rootless Containers.
</div>

Unprivileged created by:

-   Taking a set of normal UIDs and GIDs from the host
-   Usually at least `65536` of each (to be POSIX compliant)
-   Then mapping those into the container
-   Implementations mostly expect `/etc/subuid` to contain at least `65536 subuids`.
-   This allows LXD to do the "shift" in containers because it has a reserved pool of UIDs and GIDs.


### subuid and subgid subordinate(uids/gids) {#subuid-and-subgid-subordinate--uids-gids}

-   `/etc/subuid` and `/etc/subgid` let you assign extra user ids and group ids to a particular user. The `subuid` file contains a list of users and the user ids that the user is allowed to impersonate.
    -   Any resource owned by user(inside the container) which is not mapped(outside container) will get id `-1` (`nobody`)
    -   Range of ids you assign are no longer available to be assigned to other users (both primary and via `subuid`)
    -   `user` to which they are assigned now 'owns' these ids.
-   Configured via the `subid` field in `/etc/nsswitch.conf` ([nsswitch]({{< relref "20230228000520-nsswitch.md" >}})) file. (Has default set to `files`)
-   Different from [setuid and setgid bits]({{< relref "20230223124320-linux_permissions.md#setuid-and-setgid-bits" >}})
-   See [shadow-utils](https://www.mankier.com/package/shadow-utils)


#### Manual configuration {#manual-configuration}

```shell
$ cat /etc/subuid
#<user>:base_id:total_nos_of_ids_allowed
user1:100000:65536
$ cat /etc/subgid
user1:100000:65536
```


#### Using `usemod` {#using-usemod}

```shell
usermod --add-subuids 1000000-1000999999 root
usermod --add-sugids 1000000-1000999999 pappu
usermod --add-subuids 1000000-1000999999 --add-sugids 1000000-1000999999 xyzuser
```


#### What about `uid_map` and `gid_map` ? {#what-about-uid-map-and-gid-map}

These are specific to user NS. The `newuidmap` tool can help. `newuidmap` sets `/proc/[pid]/uid_map` based on its command line arguments and the uids allowed.


## Container networking {#container-networking}

-   Different container managers(docker, podman, lxd etc) provide a number of ways networking can be done with containers.
-   An interesting one is the `bridged networking` approach, which essentially boils down to `3 things`.
    -   Creating `veth` pair from `host` to `net namespace-X`. Every new container will add new `veth` interface and remove it once container is stopped. Eg. `lxc info <instance_name>` will show the `veth` created for the `instance`
    -   Adding a `bridge` for the `veth` pair to talk through. When you install `docker`, it automatically creates a `docker0` bridge created for containers to communicate.
    -   Adding IP table rules to access outside network
    -   See [Introduction to Linux interfaces for virtual networking](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2018/10/22/introduction-to-linux-interfaces-for-virtual-networking#veth)  and [Deep Dive into Linux Networking and Docker - Bridge, vETH and IPTables](https://aly.arriqaaq.com/linux-networking-bridge-iptables-and-docker/)
    -   Also see [8.2.5 About Veth and Macvlan](https://web.archive.org/web/20221127151519/https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E37670_01/E37355/html/ol_mcvnbr_lxc.html)
