+++
title = "Logic"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Functional Programming]({{< relref "20221125204135-functional_programming.md" >}}), [Type Systems]({{< relref "20230922184505-type_systems.md" >}}), [Programming Languages]({{< relref "20221101220306-programming_languages.md" >}}), [Math]({{< relref "20221101134840-math.md" >}})


## Quantifications {#quantifications}

-   `Quantification` means making statements about things.
-   In logic, this often involves `variables` that stand for different things in a `domain`.
-   `Properties` are characteristics/attributes that you can talk about. Eg. "even" and "prime" are properties of numbers.


### First order {#first-order}

In both these cases, we're talking about `some individual element/variable`

-   Universal Quantifier (∀)
    -   This symbol (∀) is like saying "for all" or "for every." It allows us to make statements about every individual element in a certain group or domain. Let's use an example to illustrate this:
    -   Example: Consider the domain of natural numbers. If we say ∀x (x is greater than 0), it means that we are making a statement about every natural number. In simpler terms, it's like saying "Every natural number is greater than 0." This statement covers all the numbers in the domain of natural numbers.
-   Existential Quantifier (∃)
    -   This symbol (∃) is like saying "there exists" or "there is at least one." It allows us to make statements about the existence of at least one individual element in a certain group or domain. Here's an example:
    -   Example: Using the domain of natural numbers again, if we say ∃x (x is even), it means that we are making a statement about the existence of at least one even number in the group of natural numbers. So, it's like saying "There exists a natural number that is even." This statement doesn't specify which number it is; it simply asserts that there is at least one.


### Second order {#second-order}

In second order, we're usually quantifying about `property` in some `domain`

-   `property` as `set` : Sets of individual things that have that property. For example, the set of all even natural numbers is a set that includes 2, 4, 6, and so on.
-   `property` as `fn`: `functions` that take in an `element` and return a Boolean indicating whether the element satisfies the `property`. (Characteristic function)


### Third order {#third-order}

In third and other higher orders, we're usually quantifying about `property` of `properties`

-   Eg. "All properties of sets of cats have the property of being mammal-related." (Here, you're not only looking at sets of cats but also at properties of those sets. i.e You're reasoning about the `property`)
-   Even though higher-order logics seem more powerful and expressive, you can still capture their ideas and statements using second-order logic.


## Implementation {#implementation}


### Datalog {#datalog}

-   <https://github.com/fkettelhoit/bottom-up-datalog-js/tree/master>
