+++
title = "Ansible"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [System Design]({{< relref "20230113141133-system_design.md" >}}), [Distributed Systems]({{< relref "20221102130004-distributed_systems.md" >}}), [Selfhosting]({{< relref "20230212140130-selfhosting.md" >}})


## Primary Concepts {#primary-concepts}


### Commands {#commands}

-   `ansible` : ad-hoc(single task playbook)
-   `ansible-playbook` : Executing playbooks
-   `ansible-inventory` : Dump the configured inventory as Ansible sees it.
-   `ansible-console` : REPL for tasks
-   `ansible-config` : Generates `ansible.cfg`, also view
-   `ansible-galaxy`


### Configuration {#configuration}

-   `ansible.cfg` : Config file, can specify inventory etc.


### Pattern {#pattern}

-   Whether ad-hoc or via playbook, we always choose `node` or `group` via `host pattern`
-   Patterns let you run commands and playbooks against specific hosts and/or groups in your inventory.
-   Patterns depend on inventory. If a host or group is not listed in your inventory, you cannot use a pattern to target it.
-   Can refer to, A single host, An IP address/FQDN, Alias, Inventory group/set of groups/all groups, More.
-   Using `ansible` command
    ```shell
    $ ansible <pattern> ...
    ```
-   Using playbook
    ```yaml
    ​- name: My first play
      hosts: <patten>
    ```
-   [Patterns: targeting hosts and groups — Ansible Documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/inventory_guide/intro_patterns.html#common-patterns)
-   `--limit <pattern>` flag can help modify pattern in adhoc manner. This is useful for running playbooks for certain hosts/groups. Eg. `ansible-playbook site.yml --limit datacenter2`


### Inventory {#inventory}

A managed list of nodes/hosts in your infrastructure is the inventory.

-   Applies on: Static servers, Dynamic servers(cloud), sub-sets(patterns)
-   Can be: YAML or INI


#### Forms {#forms}

Static file/directory or Dynamic inventory(inventory plugin/inventory script), they also can be combined.

```shell
# inventory sources in ASCII order,
# so add numeric prefix for ordering if needed
inventory/
01-openstack.yml          # inventory plugin from OpenStack cloud
02-dynamic-inventory.py   # additional hosts w dyn inventory script
03-on-prem                # static hosts and groups
04-parent-groups          # static hosts and groups
```

-   Inventory plugins: Can take advantage of the most recent updates to the Ansible core code. (Recommended)
-   Inventory script: ...


#### Group {#group}

-   Every host will always belong to `at least 2 groups` (all and ungrouped or all and some other group)
-   You can (and probably will) put each host in more than one group.
-   Parent groups = nested groups =  group of groups
-   Groups can have multiple parents and children, but not circular relationships. (Useful to create metagroups)
-   Group hosts in your inventory logically according to their **What(db/web), Where(onprem/cloud), and When(prod/stag)**.


#### Variables {#variables}

-   Can be set for: nodes/hosts, groups
-   3 ways to assign variables to inventory hosts
    -   Right in the inventory file. (Okay for smaller setups)
        ```yaml
        webservers:
          hosts:
            webserver01:
              ansible_host: 192.0.2.140
              http_port: 80
            webserver02:
              ansible_host: 192.0.2.150
              http_port: 443
          vars:
            ansible_user: my_server_user
        ```
    -   Separate variable files. **(Robust, Recommended)**
        -   Can use `lists` and `hash data` in host and group variables files. (Can't do in inventory file)
        -   Stored in `host_vars` and `group_vars` directory relative to the inventory.
            ```shell
            # group_vars / host_vars can be a file
            # or a directory (if single file becomes too large)
            ├── group_vars
            │  ├── another_group # read lexicographically
            │  │  ├── db_settings.yaml
            │  │  └── webserver_settings.yaml
            │  └── some_group.yaml

            ```
    -   via CLI using `-e` option
-   If `host` is a member of multiple `groups`, ansible reads variable values from all of those groups and merges. If values differ for the same variable in different groups, internal rules for merging is used.
-   Precedence: Host &gt; Child Group &gt; Parent Group &gt; All Group. Configurable via `ansible_group_priority` and `DEFAULT_HASH_BEHAVIOUR`
-   When you pass multiple inventory sources at the command line, Ansible merges variables in the order you pass those parameters.


#### Aliases {#aliases}

Hosts can have aliases.

<a id="code-snippet--wo aliases"></a>
```yaml
# without aliases
linux:
  hosts:
    server1.example.com:
    server2.example.com:
    server3.example.com:
windows:
  hosts:
    server4.example.com:
    server5.example.com:
    server6.example.com:

```

<a id="code-snippet--w aliases"></a>
```yaml
# with aliases, serverX is the alias
linux:
  hosts:
    server1:
      ansible_host: server1.example.com # not needed if server1(alias) is already fqdn
    server2:
      ansisle_host: 10.17.4.56
    server3:
      ansible_host: server3.example.com
windows:
  hosts:
    server4:
      ansible_host: server4.example.com
    server5:
      ansible_host: server5.example.com
    server6:
      ansible_host: 10.17.4.60
```

-   `inventory_hostname` variable should contain the hostname alias.


### Playbook {#playbook}

Playbooks are automation blueprints

```text
Playbook > Play > Task > Ansible Module
```

-   Runs in order from top to bottom
-   [Playbook Keywords](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/playbooks_keywords.html#block) can be applied at different levels of the playbook: `Play`, `Role`, `Block`, `Task` (can be overriden via cli)


#### Play {#play}

-   Basic unit of Ansible execution. Maps managed nodes (hosts) to tasks.
-   Contains: variables, roles and list of tasks


#### Task {#task}

-   An ‘action’ to be applied to the managed host.
-   Handler: Special form of a task, that only executes when the state of something else changes.
-   If a task fails on a host, Ansible takes that host out of the rotation for the rest of the playbook. See [strategies](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_strategies.html#playbooks-strategies)
-   `Blocks` create logical groups of `tasks`. Blocks also offer ways to handle task errors


#### Module {#module}

-   Ansible modules are the tools in your workshop, playbooks are your instruction manuals
-   Each task calls an Ansible module. Invoke several different modules in a playbook.
-   The code or binaries that Ansible copies to and executes on each managed node (when needed) to accomplish the action defined in each Task.
-   Multiple `collections` can contain `modules` with the same name, hence use `FQCN` in playbooks to ensure the correct module is selected,
-   Not all modules behave idempotently


## Secondary Concepts {#secondary-concepts}


### Collections {#collections}

-   Collections are a distribution format for Ansible content that can include `playbooks`, `roles`, `modules`, `filters`, and `plugins`.
-   You can install and use collections through Ansible Galaxy.
-   You don't develop a collection, you develop a role, plugin, playbook etc. Then you use all that to build a collection (`ansible-galaxy collection build ...`)


### Role {#role}

-   You can call it a certain way to structure a set of playbooks, tasks, handlers, variables, plugins, templates, files etc. Gives you some structure.
-   It has a defined directory structure with `8` main standard directories. Must include at least one of these directories.
-   `Roles` in `collections` are a bit annoying. Use stand alone `roles` when those fit best, there is nothing forcing you to use `collections`.
-   You can use it in a `play`. The `role` must be imported into the `play`. Good to keep your playbooks small.


### Plugins {#plugins}

Pieces of code that expand Ansible’s core capabilities


#### Types {#types}

```text
become,cache,callback,cliconf,connection,httpapi,inventory,
lookup,netconf,shell,vars,module,strategy,test,filter,role,keyword
```

-   Action Plugin
-   Become
-   Cache
-   Callback: Control what is displayed in the console
-   CLIConf
-   Connection: Control how you connect to a managed node
-   HTTPAPI
-   Inventory
-   Lookup: Retrieve data from outside sources such as files, databases, key/value stores, APIs, and other services. [How](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_lookups.html#)
    ```yaml
    # same thing
    loop: "{{ query('inventory_hostnames', 'all') }}"
    loop: "{{ lookup('inventory_hostnames', 'all', wantlist=True) }}"
    ```
-   NetConf
-   Shell
-   Vars
-   🌟 Module
-   Strategy
-   Test: Used for comparisons. [How](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_tests.html), [Jinja builtin](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/templates/#builtin-tests)
-   Filter: Manipulate data. [How](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_filters.html#making-variables-optional), [Jinja builtin](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.1.x/templates/#builtin-filters)
-   Role: ??
-   Keyword: [What](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/playbooks_keywords.html#play)


### Vault {#vault}


### Loops {#loops}

-   `with_<lookup>` is not deprecated but `loop` is prefered
-   [Loops — Ansible Documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/playbook_guide/playbooks_loops.html)


## Background {#background}


### SSH connection {#ssh-connection}

-   Defaults to OpenSSH, if not available, uses `paramiko` (py openssh)
-   User can be set via `remote_user` (playbook) or `ansible_user` (variable)


### Ansible behavior priority {#ansible-behavior-priority}

-   Configuration settings
-   Command-line options: Any command-line option will override any configuration setting.
-   Playbook keywords: Any playbook keyword will override any command-line option and any configuration setting.
-   Variables: Any variable will override any playbook keyword, any command-line option, and any configuration setting.
-   `-e`: To override all other settings in all other categories, you can use extra variables: --extra-vars or -e at the command line.


### Templating {#templating}

-   All templating happens on the controller. Therefore filters, tests, lookup also execute on the controller.
-   One cen create a template for a file or use templating in playbooks(templating task names etc.)


## Resources {#resources}

-   <http://www.freekb.net/Articles?tag=Ansible>
