+++
title = "Web Performance"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [HTTP]({{< relref "20230222161545-http.md" >}}), [Web Development]({{< relref "20221108105344-web_development.md" >}}), [SSE]({{< relref "20230222180430-sse.md" >}})


## While writing code {#while-writing-code}


### Module preloading {#module-preloading}

-   It provides a declarative way to preemptively fetch a module script and its dependencies.
-   This is okay for small cases but we can get deeper w static code analysis and bundlers.
-   Can be useful when loading from a CDN


### Bundlers {#bundlers}


#### Treeshaking {#treeshaking}

-   This is different from code splitting as this is more in the lines of static code analysis and getting rid of unused code in the final bundle


#### Scope hoisting {#scope-hoisting}

This hoists stuff and make references static when possible. This reduces size of our code as this allows better minifications plus also improves the performance of our code. :)


#### Code splitting/Chunking {#code-splitting-chunking}

-   Splitting code inherently does not improve performance but gives you more power over how your page works, which leveraged correctly can give you better performance.
-   General case, You should make sure content above the fold is loaded as a priority. Everything else can wait. But you can overdo it, so be aware of what's up.
-   Makes better sense if using [HTTP/2]({{< relref "20230222161545-http.md#http-2" >}})

<!--list-separator-->

-  Loading only necessary code

    -   For example, imagine you have a side menu that uses a 3rd party library, and it’s only visible when a user clicks a button in the footer.
    -   If you split that section of your code effectively, you can prevent the 3rd party library from getting into your main bundle, reducing it’s size and the amount of code the client has to parse.
    -   If the user does decide to click the button, you can show a loader and fetch the necessary code.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Better caching

    -   Separating packages from site-specific code.
    -   Usually the bulk of an app's code is going to be from packages that don't necessarily change that often
    -   So you'd want the small amount of your code that has changed to be separate from that.


#### Code duplication {#code-duplication}

If using a CDN, suppose X uses Y. And you need to use Y for your application also. You'll have to import Y separately, so there will be 2 Y(s) now. This is sad. Using bundlers we can avoid this and have a shared dep.
