+++
title = "Linear Algebra"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Math]({{< relref "20221101134840-math.md" >}})


## Products {#products}

Inner product and Outer product are terms from "Geometric Algebra"


### Inner product {#inner-product}

works on abstract vector spaces


#### Dot Product / Scalar product {#dot-product-scalar-product}

-   Intuition
    -   “the amount that two vectors are pushing in the same direction.”
    -   [Dot products and duality | Chapter 9, Essence of linear algebra - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LyGKycYT2v0)
-   Use
    -   Way of turning two vectors into a number in a way that respects how long each vector is and how much the vectors overlap.
    -   Can serve as a measure of how similar two vectors are.
-   Eg.
    -   work is the dot product of force and displacement.
    -   power is the dot product of force and velocity.


### Outer product {#outer-product}


#### Cross product {#cross-product}

-   [Cross products | Chapter 10, Essence of linear algebra - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eu6i7WJeinw&t=2s)


### Wedge product {#wedge-product}

-   In differential topology, it works on differential forms and antisymmetrizes them to make a higher degree differential form.


## Things people say {#things-people-say}

> No one, and let me repeat that, no one "gets" linear algebra, differential equations, or frequency domain on the first pass. It takes years to absorb and multiple passes.
>
> See:
>
> Bruner / Spiral Curriculum.
>
> Ebbinghaus / Spacing effect
>
> Hattie / Deep-surface-transfer learning
>
> Chunking ("How People Learn" has a good copy on this)
>
> Etc.
>
> The way you do this is you take a course, and then you take more courses. After a few years, it all connects and makes sense. The first course, I find, is often best short, simplified, and applied. Once you get through that, you can go deeper.
>
> Different angles are nice too. For linear algebra:
>
> -   Quantum computing
>
> -   Statistics and probability
>
> -   Machine learning
>
> -   Control theory
>
> -   Image processing
>
> -   Abstract algebra / groups / etc.
>
> -   Computer graphics
>
> All come to mind.
>
> On a mile-high level, this course seems ideal for a first pass. On a detailed level, I'm confused by some licensing issues.
