+++
title = "JWT"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [OAuth (Open Authorization)]({{< relref "20230301205620-authorization.md#oauth--open-authorization" >}})


## What {#what}

-   JWT is a format of a token.
-   Defines a container to transport data between interested parties.
-   JWT is independent of OAuth and OIDC


## Usecases {#usecases}

-   SSO
    -   Letting one server get authorized on another server on a one time basis
-   Sessions
    -   Use of JWTs for stateless session management is 99% of the time **BAD**
    -   Individual stateless JWT tokens cannot be invalidated.
    -   If you need (logout/access revocation etc), stateless would not work, you'll need server side state. Just deleting the secure http-only cookie will just delete the token but not really invalidate it.
    -   You can use client side logic to enforce this or maybe change the jwt secret on the server!
    -   At this point you might as well use traditional stateful opaque sessions
-   [OIDC (OpenID Connect)]({{< relref "20230301191046-authentication.md#oidc--openid-connect" >}})
    -   OIDC does not mandate the use of JWT as the `ID token` (JAR) / `access token`
        -   In fact there's no structure defined for the token, but using JWT has benefits.
        -   But OIDC tokens are transparent unlike OAuth(opaque tokens)
    -   Allows other flows (hybrid or implicit) to be used.
    -   Good library support
    -   Can hold payload
    -   Signed token, so the RP can still trust it even though it's been received via an untrusted channel.
-   Short term authorization tokens
    -   Great for short term authentication between decentralized systems. Eg. 5 minute expiration between a web api and a websocket service.
    -   JWTs are good for API tokens


## History {#history}

-   First draft in 2012
-   Final draft in 2015 : <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519>


## Concerns {#concerns}

Lot of [blogposts](https://paragonie.com/blog/2017/03/jwt-json-web-tokens-is-bad-standard-that-everyone-should-avoid) on the internet [bashing](http://cryto.net/%7Ejoepie91/blog/2016/06/13/stop-using-jwt-for-sessions/) JWT, this is mostly about how often JWT gets misused and not flaw of JWTs itself.


## Resources {#resources}

-   [JSON Web Token Introduction - jwt.io](https://jwt.io/introduction)
-   [JWT should not be your default for sessions](https://evertpot.com/jwt-is-a-bad-default/)
