+++
title = "Coroutines"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Concurrency]({{< relref "20221126204257-concurrency.md" >}}), [Programming Languages]({{< relref "20221101220306-programming_languages.md" >}}), [General Programming]({{< relref "20230122140847-general_programming.md" >}})


## What? {#what}

-   Implies supporting of explicit means for transferring control to another coroutine.
-   Coroutine is a chunk of code than can voluntarily suspend itself. i.e yield
-   It can be used for concurrency, it's [cooperative multithreading](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_%28computing%29#Scheduling) when that happens.
-   [How itch.io uses Coroutines for non-blocking IO](https://leafo.net/posts/itchio-and-coroutines.html)


### Transfer of control {#transfer-of-control}

Here, Coroutines have more control compared to exceptions.

```text
Exceptions < Coroutines < Continuations
```


## Taxonomy {#taxonomy}

See [Programming in Lua : 9.1](https://www.lua.org/pil/9.1.html) (2003)

<div class="warning small-text">

> Note: Avoid using the word "semi-coroutine"
</div>


### Based on control flow {#based-on-control-flow}


#### Symmetric coroutines {#symmetric-coroutines}

-   Only one function to transfer control


#### Asymmetric coroutines {#asymmetric-coroutines}

-   A function to `suspend` the execution of a coroutine
-   A different function to `resume` a `suspended` coroutine.


### Based on when the coroutine can suspend itself {#based-on-when-the-coroutine-can-suspend-itself}


#### Can suspend itself anywhere {#can-suspend-itself-anywhere}

-   Eg. Lua coroutines


#### Can only suspended by the main body of the coroutine {#can-only-suspended-by-the-main-body-of-the-coroutine}

-   If there's no pending calls in its control stack
-   Basically each transfer is `yield` followed by a `resume` (in lua terms)
-   Eg. Python generators


## Blocking and Non-blocking {#blocking-and-non-blocking}

-   is event loop the only way to implement non-blocking io?


## Async/Await {#async-await}

-   This is different than co-routines
-   async/await only will switch context at a yield point
-   [Async/await - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Async/await)


## Languages {#languages}


### Lua {#lua}

-   Lua offers what I call asymmetric coroutines.
-   3 different states: suspended, running, and dead.
-   From the coroutine's point of view
    -   All activity that happens while it is suspended is happening inside its call to yield.
    -   When we resume the coroutine, this call to yield finally returns and the coroutine continues its execution until the next yield or until its end.
