+++
title = "Load Balancers"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Distributed Systems]({{< relref "20221102130004-distributed_systems.md" >}}), [System Design]({{< relref "20230113141133-system_design.md" >}}), [Infrastructure]({{< relref "20221101183735-infrastructure.md" >}}), [Web Server]({{< relref "20230310200327-web_server.md" >}}), [Web Performance]({{< relref "20230503160302-web_performance.md" >}})


## Basics {#basics}

Load balancing is a vague term. but common categorization

-   Read this for [loadbalancing the loadbalancers](https://www.reddit.com/r/networking/comments/yhpfz4/how_do_you_load_balance_load_balancers/)


### DNS {#dns}

GSLB and such.


### Network {#network}

Network devices sending traffic to multiple next-hops based on equal cost routing. The next-hops can be another layer of load balancer, or the end destination (in which case it’s anycast).


### L4 {#l4}

-   They look at the “layer 4” headers to make a decision and forward each flow. These are smart, do consistent hashing, so if a destination goes down flows not going to that one still go to the same endpoint. They often have health-checks etc. Basically can have logic.
-   [IP Virtual Server - Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_Virtual_Server)


### L7 {#l7}

These look higher in the network stack, often at HTTP headers and the like. Frequently they’ll do TLS offload. These can do complicated stuff.


## Guidelines {#guidelines}


### Tips {#tips}

-   Limit concurrent connections per backend server on LB and just let it queue there
-   Set balancing to not stick to app server (if app allows it) and distribute it by `leastconn`


### How many threads/connections per machine is optimum for performance? {#how-many-threads-connections-per-machine-is-optimum-for-performance}

<div class="warning small-text">

> NOTE: I think the following is wrong.  I have to come back to this later.
</div>

-   See Resource section of [HTTP]({{< relref "20230222161545-http.md" >}})


#### <span class="org-todo todo TODO">TODO</span> Doubt {#doubt}

-   If 1 thread/req,

<!--listend-->

```text
c = cpu cores
w = % time spent waiting for DB/IO/APIs
x = account for variability of requests

c / (1 - w ) + x
```

Eg. 16 cores, 80% of the app's time is spent waiting for APIs/DB etc. Then, 16/(1-0.8) = 80.

-   What to do with this number?
    -   Set the queue size to be about that.
    -   Set application's thread count to slightly above that but not more.
