+++
title = "Prometheus"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Observability]({{< relref "20221102123214-observability.md" >}}), [PromQL]({{< relref "20221102122633-promql.md" >}})


## Service Discovery {#service-discovery}


### AWS ECS {#aws-ecs}

-   [Service discovery - Amazon Elastic Container Service](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonECS/latest/developerguide/service-discovery.html#service-discovery-pricing)
-   Seems like there are couple of ways to do it because ECS-SD is somewhat not supported officially.
    -   [Prometheus on ECS - Proof of Concept | 3h4x.github.io](https://3h4x.github.io/tech/2020/02/07/prometheus-on-ecs-poc)
        -   This uses [teralytics/prometheus-ecs-discovery](https://github.com/teralytics/prometheus-ecs-discovery)
    -   Then there is aws suggested methods
        -   This uses [AWS]({{< relref "20231228230358-aws.md" >}}) CloudMap, see [this](https://github.com/aws-samples/prometheus-for-ecs/blob/main/deploy-prometheus/README.md)


## Exposing endpoints {#exposing-endpoints}


### What do we want to expose, prometheus or grafana? {#what-do-we-want-to-expose-prometheus-or-grafana}

-   Assuming a user would need to access the prometheus UI
-   This really is not a question about prometheus/grafana but more of a question about [Infrastructure]({{< relref "20221101183735-infrastructure.md" >}}) [Security]({{< relref "20221101184454-security.md" >}}). (when [Selfhosting]({{< relref "20230212140130-selfhosting.md" >}}))
-   In some cases companies keep their grafana instance publicly accessible from the internet but behind some auth. (Usually behind reverse [Proxies]({{< relref "20230212101521-proxies.md" >}})) and the prometheus instance sits in a private subnet etc.
    -   In other cases, both prometheus and grafana might be in a private subnet and you need to be in the VPC through a [VPN]({{< relref "20230210192007-vpn.md" >}}) or something similar to be in the same network. Otherwise, things can be public and firewalls etc can be used.


### Can we expose on trusted networks? {#can-we-expose-on-trusted-networks}

-   Depends on security posture
-   Exposing that port on a "trusted" network is a possible attack vector for bad actors.
-   Exposing that port on the open internet (as is often the case) is an open invitation for attack.


### Exposing prometheus/grafana {#exposing-prometheus-grafana}

This is about protecting the endpoints provided by the prometheus binary

-   By making it public
    -   Auth + RP + Firewall rules for limited access
    -   [Protecting Prometheus: Insecure configuration exposes secrets](https://jfrog.com/blog/dont-let-prometheus-steal-your-fire/)
-   By not making it public (private subnet)
    -   Use a VPN
    -   Instead of using a VPN we could use other solutions, such as
        -   [Enable Prometheus to Scrape Anything from Anywhere | OpenZiti](https://openziti.io/blog/zitification/prometheus/part1/)
        -   <https://medium.com/@dnorth98/hello-aws-session-manager-farewell-ssh-7fdfa4134696>
        -   [Connect to an AWS VPC using subnet routes · Tailscale Docs](https://tailscale.com/kb/1021/install-aws)
        -   [AWS reference architecture · Tailscale Docs](https://tailscale.com/kb/1296/aws-reference-architecture)
        -   [Run a Tailscale VPN relay on ECS/Fargate - Platformers](https://platformers.dev/log/2022/tailscale-ecs/)
        -   [Access AWS RDS privately using Tailscale · Tailscale Docs](https://tailscale.com/kb/1141/aws-rds)


### Exposing applications exposing prometheus metrics {#exposing-applications-exposing-prometheus-metrics}

-   [Exposing /metrics endpoint to public internet](https://github.com/prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator/issues/800)
    -   Blocking access to path at load balancer/reverse proxy seems like a good way to do it
    -   The service would be accessible from the VPC anyway, so the prometheus collector instance will be able to scrape it using the private IP/whatever it gets from service discovery.


## Instrumentation {#instrumentation}


### Go (client-go) {#go--client-go}


#### Meta notes {#meta-notes}

-   When you simply use the metrics primitives, registering them and then exposing using `promhttp.HandlerFor`, you just get those metrics and some error metric. You don't get the go and process collector metrics etc.
-   Cause of inconsistencies
    -   If a metric inconsistent
    -   If a metric is equal to the new metric already registered.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Registry

    -   `Collector & Metric` have to describe themselves to the `registry`.
        -   Because inconsistencies are supposed to be detected at registration time, not at collect time.
    -   Usually you'd use the `DefaultRegistry`
        -   Comes registered with `NewGoCollector` and `NewProcessCollector`
    -   Custom Registry
        -   Implement your own `Register/Gatherer`
        -   Special properties, see NewPedanticRegistry.
        -   Avoid **global state**, as imposed by DefaultRegisterer.
        -   Use multiple registries at the same time to expose different metrics in different ways.
        -   Separate registries for testing purposes.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Gatherer

    -   `Registry` implements the `Gatherer` interface.
    -   The caller of the Gather method can then expose the gathered metrics in some way.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Metric Types &amp; Vector metric types

    -   You need `<MetricName>Opts` for creation
    -   Fundamental metric types
        -   Gauge, Counter, Summary, and Histogram
        -   Implement the `Metric` interface
        -   `Gauge, Counter, Summary, Histogram` are interfaces themselves (These embed the `Metric` and `Collector` interfaces)
    -   Vector metric types
        -   GaugeVec, CounterVec, SummaryVec, and HistogramVec
        -   This is when we partition samples along dimensions called **"labels"**
        -   Implement the `Metric` interface and the `Collector` interface
        -   `GaugeVec, CounterVec, SummaryVec, HistogramVec` are **NOT** interfaces themselves

<!--list-separator-->

-  Collector

    -   A `Collector` manages the collection of a number of Metrics
    -   For convenience, a `Metric` can also “collect itself”.
    -   Creation of the `Metric` instance happens in the `Collect` method.
    -   Usually you would not implement custom `Metric` but might implement custom `Collector`

    <!--list-separator-->

    -  Why custom collector?

        -   Usecase1: A custom Collector seems handy to bundle `Metrics` for "common registration"
        -   Usecase2: Already have metrics outside of prometheus context, "mirror" existing numbers into Metrics during collection.
            -   Metric instances “on the fly” using `NewConstMetric, NewConstHistogram`, and `NewConstSummary` (also `Must` versions)
                -   `NewConstMetric` for a float64 value: `Counter, Gauge`, and a special “type” called `Untyped` (When unsure of `Counter` or `Gauge`)
                -   Convenience functions: `GaugeFunc, CounterFunc, or UntypedFunc`
            -   The `processCollector`, `goCollector`, `expvarCollector` are collectors used for "mirroring" purposes.

    <!--list-separator-->

    -  Unchecked vs check collector

        -   scrape inconsistencies
        -   When exact metrics to be returned by a Collector cannot be predicted at registration time, but the implementer has sufficient knowledge of the whole system to guarantee metric consistency.

<!--list-separator-->

-  Instrumented Handler vs Uninstrumented Handler


#### Packages {#packages}

<!--list-separator-->

-  prometheus

    -   What it offers
        -   Primitives to instrument
            -   Eg. `NewGauge`, `NewCounterVec` etc.
        -   Registry for metrics
            -   Eg. You use `prometheus.Registerer.MusRegister` for each metric

<!--list-separator-->

-  promhttp

    -   Expose registered metrics via http
    -   Has
        -   `Handler()`
            -   Can think of it as a convenience function
            -   sort of same was using `InstrumentMetricHandler` with `HandlerFor`
        -   `HandlerFor`
            -   Takes in `prometheus.Gatherer` and `promhttp.HandlerOpts`
            -   HandlerOpts defines the behavior of the returned Handler
            -   Custom instrumentation/Gathers etc.

<!--list-separator-->

-  promauto

    -   Metrics constructors with automatic registration.
    -   When you are not concerned with fine-grained control of when and how to register metrics with the registry
    -   Allows you to ignore registration altogether in simple cases.
    -   Provides constructors
        -   Top-level functions
            -   Return Collectors registered with the global registry (`prometheus.DefaultRegisterer`)
        -   Set are methods of the Factory type
            -   Return Collectors registered with the `custom registry` the Factory was constructed with.
            -   Using `prometheus.NewRegistry()` and `promauto.With(reg)`

    <!--list-separator-->

    -  Registration Panicking

        -   Input provided by the caller that is invalid on its own.
        -   Incompatible metric is added to an unrelated part of the code
        -   With global registry
            -   Where simply importing another package can trigger a panic
            -   If the newly imported package registers metrics in its init function
        -   Steps with vanilla `prometheus`
            -   You first create the metric/collectors
            -   Decide explicitly if you want to register it with a local or the global registry
            -   Decide if you want to handle the error or risk a panic.
        -   Steps with vanilla `promauto`
            -   Registration is automatic
            -   If it fails, it will always panic.
            -   Constructors will often be called in the var section of a file
                -   Which means that panicking will happen as a side effect of merely importing a package.

<!--list-separator-->

-  push

    -   Push registered metrics
