+++
title = "Podman"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Containers]({{< relref "20230218104617-containers.md" >}}), [Docker]({{< relref "20230209185925-docker.md" >}}), [OCI Ecosystem]({{< relref "20230603000641-oci_ecosystem.md" >}})


Alternative to [Docker]({{< relref "20230209185925-docker.md" >}}) and hence does not use `containerd`

Creates containers without daemon, hence plays nice w systemd.

So you can create host systemd unit files for container runs nicely :)
    -   See [podman-generate-systemd — Podman documentation](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-generate-systemd.1.html)

Additionally, allows init systems inside the container by design. Unlike docker where the philosophy is not to have an init system.

Will not work as a container engine for [Kubernetes]({{< relref "20221102125748-kubernetes.md" >}}), instead suggest using `CRI-O`. As mentioned in [OCI Ecosystem]({{< relref "20230603000641-oci_ecosystem.md" >}})


## Difference with [Docker]({{< relref "20230209185925-docker.md" >}}) {#difference-with-docker--20230209185925-docker-dot-md}

> Processes behind the scenes
>
> What’s happening behind the scenes for this command is quite interesting. There’s a couple of processes being used to manage our ubuntu container. A slirp4netns process is running. This is a tool which helps networking work in unprivileged containers.
>
> There’s also a conmon process running, which is another helper process.
>
> These two processes are used for every container, so if you run 10 containers, you’ll get 20 supporting processes.
>
> Comparing this to Docker, conmon seems to be the equivalent of the containerd-shim process that runs with every container and there’s no slirp4netns equivalent needed as Docker is running with root privileges.
>
> From [Comparing Docker and Podman - Basic Operations](https://raesene.github.io/blog/2020/02/01/Comparing-Docker-And-Podman/)
