+++
title = "ulimits"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Linux]({{< relref "20221101150211-linux.md" >}})


## What is it? {#what-is-it}

-   A shell builtin that works on a per-process basis. Limit is then adopted by the shell that called it and inherited by children(i.e children will have their own limits, number will be same though).
-   The shell builtin essentially wraps `getrlimit` / `setrlimit` system calls.
-   Option in container tools like docker, podman. i.e it'll set ulimit for the container sort of.
    -   TODO: `ulimit` in containers is tricky, I've to check it properly when I get time. I mean it's used slightly differently and `nproc` has some host specific things etc. Little complicated.


## What about process? {#what-about-process}

-   Once a process starts, its ulimits are set. The process itself can change its `soft ulimit` up to the `hard ulimit`.
-   `prlimit` can help you change ulimits of running process


## Relationship w `limits.conf` {#relationship-w-limits-dot-conf}

<div class="warning small-text">

> Limits are a property of a process.
</div>


### About limits.conf {#about-limits-dot-conf}

-   The file **does not** affect system services.
-   `/etc/security/limits.conf` file provides configuration for the `pam_limits` PAM module
-   `/etc/security/limits.conf` allows setting resource limits for users and groups logged in via [PAM]({{< relref "20230228014608-pam.md" >}}).
-   However `/etc/security/limits.conf` does not work `for the system` using `systemd`. Following needs to be changed instead.
    -   `/etc/systemd/system.conf`
    -   `/etc/systemd/user.conf`
    -   `/etc/systemd/system/unit.d/override.conf`


### Types of limits {#types-of-limits}

-   Hard limits
    -   Set by `root` and enforced by the kernel.
    -   Mark the `maximum value` which cannot be exceeded by setting a soft limit.
-   Soft limits
    -   Configured by the user within the range allowed by the hard limits.
    -   Simply the currently enforced limits.


### System and User limits {#system-and-user-limits}

Limits are inherited when a child process is created

-   System wide limits
    -   Should be set during the system initialization in init scripts, systemd specific conf files etc.
-   User limits
    -   Should be set during user login for example by using `pam_limits` (`/etc/security/limits.conf`)
