+++
title = "cgroups"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Linux]({{< relref "20221101150211-linux.md" >}}), [Containers]({{< relref "20230218104617-containers.md" >}})


## What? {#what}

-   A Linux kernel feature which allow processes to be organized into hierarchical groups whose usage of various types of resources can then be limited and monitored.
-   See [Control Group v2 — The Linux Kernel documentation](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/v5.5/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html)


### Core {#core}

-   cgroup core is primarily responsible for hierarchically organizing processes.


### Controller {#controller}

-   cgroup controller is usually responsible for distributing a specific type of system resource along the hierarchy
-   Although there are utility controllers which serve purposes other than resource distribution.


### Interface {#interface}

-   The kernel's cgroup interface is provided through a pseudo-filesystem called `cgroupfs`.


### Namespace {#namespace}

-   See [Linux Namespaces]({{< relref "20230304175529-linux_namespaces.md" >}})
-   The `CLONE_NEWCGROUP` provides a mechanism to virtualize the "view" of the “/proc/$PID/cgroup” file and cgroup mounts. Without it it will show complete path of the cgroup of a process. Which may leak potential system level information to the isolated processes.
-   In a container setup where we're trying to isolate things, we want to use a namespace for cgroups so that it has an isolated view of cgroups.


## cgroups vs ulimit {#cgroups-vs-ulimit}


### ulimit {#ulimit}

-   See [ulimits]({{< relref "20230225145310-ulimits.md" >}})
-   A limit of 2 GiB main memory applies to a single process (and its threads). And a child process of this process inherits also a limit of 2 GiB main memory, but this is 2 GiB for its own usage.
-   In other words, each process would have a limit of 2 GiB, and together they could consume up to 4 GiB of main memory.


### cgroups {#cgroups}

-   So, control groups allow to limit resources over a group of processes.
-   Limiting the main memory to 2 GiB for a group containing 3 processes, means the main memory used by all 3 processes together may not exceed 2 GiB.


## cgroupv1 &amp; cgroupv2 {#cgroupv1-and-cgroupv2}

-   If `/sys/fs/cgroup/cgroup.controllers` is present on your system, you are using v2, otherwise you are using v1.
-   [cgroup2 · Control and maximize resource utilization](https://facebookmicrosites.github.io/cgroup2/)
-   [About cgroup v2 | Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/architecture/cgroups/)
-   [Control Group v2 — The Linux Kernel documentation](https://docs.kernel.org/admin-guide/cgroup-v2.html)
