+++
title = "Docker"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Containers]({{< relref "20230218104617-containers.md" >}})

Ya allah.


## History {#history}

-   Started out being built on top of `LXC`
-   Later moved beyond `LXC` containers to its own execution environment called `libcontainer`.


## FAQ {#faq}


### How layers create bloat? {#how-layers-create-bloat}

```text
RUN apt-get install foo
RUN foo generate-things
RUN apt-get uninstall foo
```

-   This will effectively still have `foo` in the image. (It's just masking)
-   Layers can add bloat to a docker file. This depends very much on the specifics of what the `RUN` steps are doing and the order of them.
-   Eg. Just changing files will often create a layer with another copy of those files with the different attributes (e.g. chmod). That means you have very similar content in two separate layers which creates bloat.
-   Each "ALLCAPS" directive in a Dockerfile, like RUN, COPY, etc. are "layers" that get cached. So installing deps should be different layer than copying source code.


### What's the solution to layer bloat? {#what-s-the-solution-to-layer-bloat}

-   Deleting before creating the layer prevents them from ever actually being stored. You can do this with [HEREDOC](https://www.docker.com/blog/introduction-to-heredocs-in-dockerfiles/) :)
-   When developing scripts for running inside Docker, to copying of the script as late as possible in the Dockerfile so that the preceding layers can be reused
-   It is possible with build stages/[multi staged builds](https://docs.docker.com/build/building/multi-stage/) and `copy from`, but not super trivial.


### What firewall changes does Docker do? {#what-firewall-changes-does-docker-do}

See [Firewalls]({{< relref "20230306125249-firewalls.md" >}})


### How does docker handle networking {#how-does-docker-handle-networking}

```shell
docker network ls --filter 'driver=bridge' # docker0 is default and is named "bridge"
docker network inspect <net_id>
```


#### IP and ports {#ip-and-ports}

-   Default network range for docker: `172.17.0.0/16` (TODO: Confirm this range, not that it matters for us)
    -   Host: `172.17.0.1` (`docker0` ip)
    -   1st container: `172.17.0.2`, 2nd container: `172.17.0.3` etc.
-   When setting port mapping, you can specify the IP, otherwise might get binded to `0.0.0.0`


#### [iptables]({{< relref "20230309160055-iptables.md" >}}) changes {#iptables--20230309160055-iptables-dot-md--changes}

-   Creates these chains: `DOCKER`, `DOCKER-USER`, `DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE1`, and `DOCKER-ISOLATION-STAGE2`
    -   `DOCKER` : Rules for docker
    -   `DOCKER-USER` : Custom user rules that'll go before docker's rules.
-   Any changes added to `FORWARD` chain will be evaluated after `DOCKER` and `DOCKER-USER` chains.
-   `docker0` : Rules are used in the `FORWARD` chain for forwarding packets on this interface to the running containers.


### What's dockers image format? {#what-s-dockers-image-format}

It's OCI but [legacy](https://github.com/moby/moby/issues/25779).Maybe updated recently?


### What about the scratch image? {#what-about-the-scratch-image}

-   It's a very simple thing even simpler than busy box. Doesn't even have a shell.
-   You can attach a shell to it by running another container in its namespace etc. for debugging.


### What's Moby? {#what-s-moby}

-   Umbrella project that develops components used by docker and other container engine. Docker(cli+dockerd) also fall under it.


### RUN vs ARG vs CMD vs ENTRYPOINT {#run-vs-arg-vs-cmd-vs-entrypoint}

-   `RUN`
    -   Executes commands in a new layer, creating a new image. Commonly used for installing software packages.
-   `CMD`
    -   Default set of arguments that are supplied to the ENTRYPOINT process.
    -   `docker run` sets the `CMD`
-   `ENTRYPOINT`
    -   Docker's default entrypoint is `/bin/sh -c`. So if you provide `CMD` without entrypoint, or `docker run` it, then `CMD` will be arg to `sh -c` and `SIGTERM` will go to `pid1` and not to what you have in CMD.
    -   Can be overridden with `--entrypoint`
-   `ARG`
    -   ARG is used to define a build-time variable, possibly with a default value embedded in the Dockerfile, which can be overridden at build-time (by passing --build-arg).
    -   `ENV` overrides `ARG`, also if there is actual environment variable in the based image, that too would override `ARG`


## Build Caching {#build-caching}


### Theory {#theory}

-   For anything complex prefer using `buildx`
-   For build caching, we have
    -   `-mount=type=cache`
        -   Mount inside the temporary container
        -   Useful when a step pulls down a lot of external dependencies that do not need to be in the image and can safely be reused between builds.
        -   docs: <https://docs.docker.com/build/guide/mounts/>
    -   `--cache-to/from`
        -   Store the result of a build step and reuse the layer in future builds
        -   Avoiding the need to `RUN` the command again.
        -   Docs
            -   <https://docs.docker.com/reference/cli/docker/buildx/build/>
            -   <https://docs.docker.com/build/ci/github-actions/cache/>
    -   Both of them serve different purpose, see this SO answer [caching - Difference between --cache-to/from and --mount type=cache](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76351391/difference-between-cache-to-from-and-mount-type-cache-in-docker-buildx-build/76351422#76351422) for the difference
-   Optimal cache will be when we're able to use both, but
    -   To summarize, `--mount type=cache` [doesn't make sense](https://github.com/moby/buildkit/issues/1512) with an "ephemeral builder" (Eg. github actions), but if we're using a non-ephemeral machine to do our builds, then we can benifit from both `-mount=type=cache` and `--cache-to/from`
-   `--cache-to/from` is more widely supported.


### How we use it {#how-we-use-it}

-   imo just using `--cache-to/from` should be enough for most usecases for now
-   But for fast local builds we'll keep on using `--mount=type=cache,target=$CACHE_DIR_OF_LANGUAGE_PKG_MGR`
    -   i.e having `--mount=type=cache` will not hurt us
