+++
title = "PAM"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [ulimits]({{< relref "20230225145310-ulimits.md" >}}), [Linux]({{< relref "20221101150211-linux.md" >}})


## Intro {#intro}

-   PAM is basically an auth system.
-   When some process tries a username/password combo, `pam` can decide to allow/reject access.
-   Typically [/etc/passwd and /etc/shadow]({{< relref "20230228021247-linux_security.md#etc-passwd-and-etc-shadow" >}}) is used by default to check the password attempt.
-   But this can be configured to use other systems like LDAP or anything else you make a module for and configure it with PAM.
-   It is largely used in [Directory Services]({{< relref "20230301131822-directory_services.md" >}})
-   PAM also provides other functions, beyond authentication
    -   Access control (authorization)
    -   Session setup
    -   Password changes


## PAM and LDAP {#pam-and-ldap}

-   `NSCD` to handle user, group, dns, caching.
-   [Kerberos]({{< relref "20230301183027-kerberos.md" >}}) w LDAP server
    -   `pam_ldap` for user look-ups
    -   `pam_krb5` for authn and authz.
-   PAM and NSS can talk to LDAP directly using `pam_ldap` and `nss_ldap` , but SSSD has benifits.


### SSSD {#sssd}

-   System Security Services Daemon
-   Instead of directly configuring LDAP, one can use SSSD.
-   It has NSS and PAM modules. The modules communicate with the corresponding SSSD responders. SSSD responders talk to the SSSD Monitor. Look up the user in LDAP, uses Kerberos KDC for authN etc.
-   Advantage is that it handles everything in a centralised place.
-   It provides offline support via its cache. Caching might conflict with `nscd`


## Why PAM is a mess now? {#why-pam-is-a-mess-now}

-   It seems like it tries to support a lot of things out of the box that may not be relevant these days, like `mail` and `limits`.
-   Cleartext?? It is plaintext???


### Different implementations {#different-implementations}

-   Original PAM
-   Linux PAM
-   OpenPAM (Used by BSD)


## How is authentication handled? (Steps) {#how-is-authentication-handled--steps}

-   `user` attempts to log in to some `service`
-   The `service` authenticating that `user` will start an authentication session using PAM, with the `pam_start` function
-   `pam_start` takes arguments `(user, service)` . The `service` will pick rules from `/etc/pam.d/[service_name]` for authentication.
-   `/etc/pam.d/[service_name]` describes a `shared object` which will be opened with `dlopen`
    -   The PAM library calls functions in the library to process data/collect new data for user.
    -   Those `shared libraries` are in `/lib64/security`
    -   Each `shared object` should have a `man page` on your system, describing the arguments and file access.
-   Once a user is authenticated, `service` will need to load information about `user` (eg. groups). See [getpwnam(3)](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/getpwnam.3.html), [getgrouplist(3)](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/getgrouplist.3.html)
    -   These functions consult [nsswitch]({{< relref "20230228000520-nsswitch.md" >}}).
    -   Just like PAM, it mentions `shared objects` that are loaded with `dlopen`.
    -   Those shared objects are at `/lib64/libnss_<name>.so.2`
-   Links
    -   [pam.conf(5) - Linux manual page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/pam.d.5.html)
    -   [pam_start(3) - Linux manual page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/pam_start.3.html)
    -   [dlopen(3) - Linux manual page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/dlopen.3.html)
    -   [The Linux-PAM Module Writers' Guide](https://fossies.org/linux/Linux-PAM-docs/doc/mwg/html/Linux-PAM_MWG.html)
    -   [nsswitch.conf(5) - Linux manual page](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/nsswitch.conf.5.html)
