+++
title = "CSRF"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Security]({{< relref "20221101184454-security.md" >}}), [Cookies]({{< relref "20230615111924-cookies.md" >}}), [CORS]({{< relref "20230302210256-cors.md" >}}), [Web Security]({{< relref "20230302210332-web_security.md" >}}), [Web Authentication]({{< relref "20221109172102-web_authentication.md" >}})


Cross Site Request Forgery

It an attack


## Nature of the attack {#nature-of-the-attack}

-   It's a server side concern. Any API request that the server gets that `alters server state` should make sure it's a legit request. This is usually done via a "CSRF check".
-   It does not attempt direct theft of data because the attacker does not see the response of the forged request because of [Same Origin Policy (SOP)]({{< relref "20230616182504-same_origin_policy_sop.md" >}}) and appropriate [CORS]({{< relref "20230302210256-cors.md" >}}) configuration.


## Some ways CSRF attack can happen {#some-ways-csrf-attack-can-happen}


### Clicking on link {#clicking-on-link}

-   You're logged in bank.com, [Cookies]({{< relref "20230615111924-cookies.md" >}}) are there
-   evil.com has a link `bank.com?tranfer=1000`, by clicking on that link you'll execute the thing because you're logged in
-   Solution: Use samesite attribute for the cookie w appropriate value


### Form submit on page load {#form-submit-on-page-load}

-   `evil.com` can contain a hidden form that submits POST on page load to `bank.com`. Your cookies used indirectly by attacker.
-   The response from `bank.com` to `evil.com` will be a cross-origin response and [Same Origin Policy (SOP)]({{< relref "20230616182504-same_origin_policy_sop.md" >}}) will drop that response but since the POST request already happened(Because SOP allows cross-origin writes!) and the server processed it does not care about that response getting dropped cuz [Same Origin Policy (SOP)]({{< relref "20230616182504-same_origin_policy_sop.md" >}})
-   Prevention
    -   This can be prevented if bank.com took a CSRF token(session based) along with the POST request. evil.com would not have access to CSRF token.
    -   This CSRF Token should be stateless, should be part of the POST request and not be stored anywhere(cookie, localstoage etc)
    -   This has to be done at application code level, can't be done at proxy level.


## Prevention mechanisms {#prevention-mechanisms}

-   Check [Cross-site request forgery](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cross-site_request_forgery#Cookie-to-header_token)
-   Check [Cross-Site Request Forgery Prevention](https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/Cross-Site_Request_Forgery_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html)


### SameSite cookie attribute {#samesite-cookie-attribute}

-   See [Cookies]({{< relref "20230615111924-cookies.md" >}})
-   This is a client side
-   SameSite will help mitigate certain class of [CSRF]({{< relref "20230616090755-csrf.md" >}}) attacks.
-   `SameSite=Lax` still allows form submissions from subdomains of your [primary domain to](https://simonwillison.net/2021/Aug/3/samesite/) carry their cookies. So we still need csrf token.


### Using the CSRF token in DOM {#using-the-csrf-token-in-dom}

-   Anti-CSRF tokens generally should not be stored in cookies but can be stored anywhere in the DOM and can be extracted via javascript and set back to the server via `X-CSRF-Token` header.
-   The auth details remain in cookie, a custom session only csrf token is baked into the DOM.
-   This way evil.com even if it does CSRF using hidden form etc, because of lack of csrf token they'll fail.


### Using CSRF in cookies (Double-submit cookie) {#using-csrf-in-cookies--double-submit-cookie}

-   Use a CSRF token and store it in a cookie ???
-   CSRF token never store in cookie!! ?? (doesnt make sense chatgpt uses)
