+++
title = "Svelte"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

> Svelte5 might change things all of this is based on svelte4


## Gotchas/FAQ {#gotchas-faq}


### Combinations {#combinations}

|                 | SSR | Pre-render         | static-adpter | other-adapter |
|-----------------|-----|--------------------|---------------|---------------|
| SPA             | -   | -                  | YES           | -             |
| Mixed SPA       | -   | YES(some)+fallback | YES           | -             |
| Hydration       | YES | -                  | -             | YES           |
| Mixed Hydration | YES | YES(some)          | -             | YES           |
| SSG             | -   | YES(all)           | YES           | -             |

-   Some pages prerendered, some dynamic
    -   Use any adapter here and then use `export const prerender` as per need per page.
-   Full Static Site Generation
    -   Use `adapter-static` (Skips any `+server.js` related stuff)
-   SPA
    -   Use `adapter-static`
    -   Disable prerender (Use `svelte fallback`)
    -   Disable SSR (When ssr is disabled, its SPA mode)
        -   We can still pre-render individual pages (enable ssr and prerender on those pages)


### About Pre-rendering {#about-pre-rendering}

-   Prerendering means that when we deploy our website, all the `+page/+layout files` javascript is compiled and executed and the resulting static HTML pages are saved.
    -   i.e `page load` functions will be executed and baked into the generated page
    -   Can be used along with `ssr` (altogether or on page-by-page basis)
-   The way prerender works is that it crawls all your rendered pages for links so it can pre-render them all.
-   To tell sveltekit where to find links you that you may not have linked on your pages you should use `entries`


#### When prerender vs ssr? {#when-prerender-vs-ssr}

-   Some pages only have static content, or they fetch content that changes very little over time.
-   If the page keeps on changing we want to be using ssr. (But we don't want to be using sveltekit backend, so we mostly don't want ssr)


### Hydration {#hydration}

-   Interactive javascript is separate from `SSR` and `prerendering`
-   Hydration happens when you're using SSR
-   Term used for loading interactive javascript on your page is `hydration`
-   Happens in the browser and after the page is all rendered
    -   Once the components are fully hydrated, they can react to changes to their properties just like any newly created Svelte component.


### SSR &amp; Static Adapter in Svelte {#ssr-and-static-adapter-in-svelte}

> `npm run build` will build both server and client component if you don't use this adapter

-   See [The missing guide to understanding adapter-static in SvelteKit](https://khromov.se/the-missing-guide-to-understanding-adapter-static-in-sveltekit/)


#### Svelte adapters {#svelte-adapters}

-   You apply the adapter in `svelte.config.js`
-   Adapters are for production/deployment
-   When you use local dev with npm dev, you're doing SSR anyway
-   `adapter-node` runs SSR on a Node server
-   `adapter-netlify` runs SSR in Netlify functions


#### `adapter-static` {#adapter-static}

```file:
export const prerender = false;
export const ssr = false;
```

-   Prerendered routes
    -   We can route to known, prerendered routes
    -   Has associated `.html` file that represents the HTML content for that route.
    -   pre-renders results from any `load()` calls at build time
-   Dynamic routes
    -   We can route to unknown, dynamic routes


### Reactivity {#reactivity}


#### $ symbol {#symbol}

-   `$`: accessing reactive value
-   `$:` reactive statement
-   `$$`
    -   `$$` doesn't indicate that this is a store value; it's just a naming convention.
-   See [The many meanings of $ in Svelte - Geoff Rich](https://geoffrich.net/posts/svelte-$-meanings/)


### SvelteKit routing directory structure {#sveltekit-routing-directory-structure}


#### General directories {#general-directories}

-   `src/hooks*`
-   `src/lib`
-   `src/params`
    -   For storing [matchers](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/advanced-routing#matching)
-   `src/routes`
-   `src/service-worker`


#### Components {#components}

-   Components need not just be `*.svelte` file, it can be a directory with an `index.ts` and the `<component>.svelte` and the index.ts file can be exporting the component
-   Global components will probably live in `/src/lib/components`
    -   But we can have route-&gt;page specific components inside directory conventionally named `(components)`
    -   i.e If components and modules are needed by multiple routes, it's a good idea to put them in $lib.


#### Structure {#structure}

-   `+` signifies a "route file". Any other "files" (**NOT** directories!) inside a `/src/route` directory are ignored by SvelteKit. So we can use custom files and use them in the `+<>.svelte/ts` files. Eg. subcomponents/modules etc.
    -   If you want to create directories inside `src/routes` and you want the directory to not appear in the path, then use `(<directory name>)`
-   there are `*.server.*` variants that we're skipping here because not using atm
-   Root: `/src/routes`
    -   `+page.svelte` : Page component
    -   `+page.ts`
        -   Data for page component, exports a `load` function
        -   Can also be used to configure other behavior of how the page loads and such (prerender/ssr etc)
    -   `+error.svelte`: Page to show if `+page.ts`'s `load` function fails
        -   Static fallback error page: `src/error.html`, it'll bubble up to this
        -   Nested `+error.svelte` page will not show up though for that you'd have to use `[...path]` like rest params (See advance routing)
    -   `+layout.svelte`
        -   Layout that applies to every page
        -   Only needs to have `<slot>`
    -   `+layout.ts`
        -   Data loading using `load` function for `+layout.svelte`
        -   Child pages will automatically have this data

<!--list-separator-->

-  Dynamic routing

    -   Priority of routes is basically more specific route name wins
    -   We'd want to use `matchers` from `src/params` as such: `src/routes/archive/[page=integer]`
    -   `/src/routes/something/[slug]`
    -   `/[org]/[repo]/tree/[branch]/[...file]` this will allow for  `/sveltejs/kit/tree/main/documentation/docs/04-advanced-routing.md`, the parameters will be correct names and be available to the page.
    -   Use `(<dir name>)` if you want have a subsection of things inside `src/routes` but don't want it in the url. Eg. usecases
        -   Eg. `(utils)` / `(components)` directory
        -   Eg. `(marketing)` / `(app)`, just high level business level separation but these need to be in the same hierarchy in the URL but different `+layout.svelte`


### About `on:click` {#about-on-click}

-   I am unsure about this but seems like this sort of only works with primitive HTML elements
-   Svelte allows you to [forward](https://svelte.dev/docs/element-directives#on-eventname) things, but if suppose you want to `on:click` on a event [as such](https://forum.framework7.io/t/svelte-onclick-of-listitem-do-not-work/10052), seems like we can't do it directly, you need to "forward".
    -   What you need to do: Wrap the `component` around a primitive element such as `div` or `button` etc. Then you can use `on:click` on the main `component` when using it and then when defining the component since you wrapped it around with a primitive element, you can use the forward mechanism by simply passing `on:click` there and things should work.


## Concepts {#concepts}


### Routing related files {#routing-related-files}

-   Files we have
    -   We have `+layout.svelte|ts|js`
    -   We have `+page.svelte|ts|js`
-   In these files, the variables are not shared unless you use a `load` function and then use `export let data` in `+page.svelte`


### Routing in Svelte {#routing-in-svelte}

-   We could use conditional components but using SvelteKit
    -   with `@sveltejs/adapter-static`
    -   along with disabling SSR is much more straightforward


### Loading data {#loading-data}

-   Sveltekit has a whole page on loading data, check that
-   The `load` method has a special `fetch` function which is enhanced version of the normal `fetch` api method.


### Store in Svelte {#store-in-svelte}

-   Types
    -   Readable
    -   Writable
    -   Derived


## State Management in Svelte {#state-management-in-svelte}

-   See [State Management Libraries]({{< relref "20221108105322-state_management_libraries.md" >}}) for [React Framework]({{< relref "20221220014557-react_framework.md" >}}) aswell


### What's the combo of connect-es, transtackQuery, svelteStore and PageLoad? (when we don't want Selvekit backend features) {#what-s-the-combo-of-connect-es-transtackquery-sveltestore-and-pageload--when-we-don-t-want-selvekit-backend-features}

-   If you're using `connect-es` for [Protocol Buffers]({{< relref "20230522131118-protocol_buffers.md" >}}), it has something called [connectrpc/connect-query-es](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-query-es) which branches of TanStackQuery
    -   Issue is the svelte variant [is not very well supported yet](https://github.com/connectrpc/connect-query-es/issues/324)
    -   Because of which we'd want to use connect-web so that we can do rest api calls


### <span class="org-todo todo TODO">TODO</span> Overview {#overview}


### Using `context` and `store` together {#using-context-and-store-together}

> -   A store contains a value that can be subscribed to, and is thus reactive.
> -   A context makes a value accessible to a whole tree of components.

-   context and store both are ideas and implementation in svelte
-   context can be used usually in cases when you want to avoid prop drilling
-   context are not reactive like stores
-   So it's a safe practice to pass around `stores` in `contexts`. This seems to me like a solid combination.
    -   i.e all components have access to the store, and can reactively use the value within it.


### Other notes and tips {#other-notes-and-tips}

-   When writing `store.ts` prefer using multiple stores and use `context` and `derived` stores to make better use of it. In addition, use factory pattern to create the stores. Eg. `createXStore`
    ```typescript
    const createXStore = () => {
    	const { subscribe, set, update } = writable([]);
    	return {
    		// NOTE: A valid writable store requires atleast subscribe and set
    		// NOTE: We could also wrap around set around another fn
    		//       eg. set: (newVal) => {doSomething(); set(newVal)}
    		// NOTE: What "subscribe" returns is what you can call an unsubscribe with
    		subscribe,
    		set,
    		// NOTE: Instead of directly using exposing "update" here we could also
    		//       have custom methods that use update.
    		update
    	};
    };
    ```
-   `+page.js` can't use the `$` (autosubscribe) shortcut to access the value from a writable store.
    -   You'll need to explicitly subscribe
    -   Make sure to unsubscribe if not using `$`
-   using `#await` : <https://www.reddit.com/r/sveltejs/comments/124rx4n/sveltekit_when_to_use_load_vs_await/>


## Effect x Svelte {#effect-x-svelte}

> TheStockBroker
>
> -   Unfortunately I am not familiar with a live example, but fortunately svelte is pretty close-to-metal so integration would not be too demanding, basically just using a store or something to represent effects. There are 2 main ways to integrate effect into your application. As a logic engine, it holds the state, the actions, and context of your application. Or as a workflow executor, it only handles actions, you must handle the rest. Theres also the consideration on what exists servers-side and what is allowed to "leak" into the client side. All-in-all the latter version is simpler to work with but less powerful
> -   The former would requiring introducing effect-rx into the mix, which is rather advanced in concept. I can help you understand it but it's non-trivial and builds on a lot of previous understanding


## Forms {#forms}


### What we currently using {#what-we-currently-using}

-   svelte forms(base) + super forms(form state management) + formsnap(to avoid html boilerplate)
-   Even though superforms has `setError`  to show error, rather use `setMessage`. so `setMessage` for everything.


## Tips {#tips}


### <span class="org-todo todo TODO">TODO</span> My svelte no-scroll app template {#my-svelte-no-scroll-app-template}

-   This is pretty annoying and has killed lot of my time in the past


### [Design Patterns]({{< relref "20221125204047-design_patterns.md" >}}) for Svelte {#design-patterns--20221125204047-design-patterns-dot-md--for-svelte}

-   [Design Patterns for Building Reusable Svelte Components | Render Blog](https://render.com/blog/svelte-design-patterns)
