+++
title = "Message Queue"
author = ["Hrishikesh Barman"]
draft = false
+++

tags
: [Task Queue]({{< relref "20230404163634-task_queue.md" >}}), [Queues, Scheduling and orchestrator]({{< relref "20231025103420-queues_and_scheduling.md" >}}), [Message Passing]({{< relref "20230404153903-message_passing.md" >}})

<!--listend-->

-   One of more popular [Messaging Patterns]({{< relref "20230404153903-message_passing.md#messaging-patterns" >}})
-   Async communication on an infrastructural level
-   The `Queue` itself is just a data structure/container and usually needs a `Broker` (Queue Manager)
-   This is different from distributed [Task Queue]({{< relref "20230404163634-task_queue.md" >}}), Message Queue compliment Task queues.


## Message Broker (Queue Manager) {#message-broker--queue-manager}

Sort of middleware that can handle things like routing, validate, store, handle backpressure, deliver stuff etc.


## FAQ {#faq}


### NAK/ NACK? {#nak-nack}

-   Ack Acknowledges a message was completely handled
-   `Nak` Signals that the message will not be processed now and processing can move onto the next message, NAK'd message will be retried
    -   <https://docs.nats.io/using-nats/developer/develop_jetstream#acknowledging-messages>


## Polling {#polling}

-   User submits a request via the web application
-   Backend handles that message by adding a message to the message queue.
-   Consumer gets message, makes HTTP call to another web service to actually submit the request.
-   **From there, the polling logic takes over**
-   Subsequent messages on the queue each represent a polling attempt to retrieve the results.
-   If job has no results, consumer places message back on the queue
    -   We can delay the next polling attempt (configurable).
    -   Delay logic can use TTL and dead letter definitions etc.


## Error Handling {#error-handling}


### Fail Fast {#fail-fast}

Bail out


### Dead Letter Queue {#dead-letter-queue}

-   Failed messages will be written to a DLQ
-   Now you can inspect items in the DLQ and after making any required changes you can now re-process the message from the DLQ
-   Almost always needs manual intervention or code to handle stuff written to DLQ
